Refrigerated food segment profit declined by 16%, due to lower foodservice sales, a significant decline in commodity, profitability and increased supply chain expenses due to COVID-19, profitability was also impacted by one-time start-up expenses related to our new plant in Omaha.
Incremental supply chain costs related to COVID-19 of $15 million were the primary reason for a $13 million decline in pre-tax earnings.
We saw a positive signs of recovery in foodservice this quarter even as the business declined 17%, compared to last year, due to the continued impacts of the pandemic on the industry.
Net earnings and diluted earnings per share declined 9%, due primarily to incremental supply chain costs and higher tax expense.
Our team generated strong top line growth with sales increasing 3% to a record $2.5 billion all four segments delivered sales growth and achievement that hasn't been accomplished since 2016.
Jennie-O Turkey Store segment profit declined 30%, lower foodservice sales increased supply chain costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic and higher freight expenses were key drivers to the lower profitability.
Absent the COVID expenses pre-tax earnings would have increased; total COVID expenses have started to decline from the prior quarterly run rate of $20 million.
COVID-related direct expenses of $15 million were the primary driver to pre-tax earnings declining $13 million or 5%.
In addition to the MegaMex results, the 35% increase in segment profit was driven by higher sales and a favorable mix.
We saw top line strength across many of our brands, including SPAM, SKIPPY, Hormel Compleats and Herdez, which led to volume increases of 4% and the sales increases of 7%.
Our foodservice business was impacted by lower K through 12 and college and university business in addition to continued weakness in the foodservice industry.
Our deli channel sales increased 7% this quarter; Columbus branded products led the way with exceptional growth from grab-and-go items.
Our retail business continued to perform extremely well with sales increasing 13% for the quarter.
Additionally, we paid $11 million in fiscal 2020 and unconditional bonuses to our team members to provide further financial security.