Our first quarter pro forma adjusted EBITDA grew 10% versus last year due to our integration savings, the impact of the Norman Hay acquisition last quarter, and the additional cost control measures we put in place to combat the global effect of COVID-19 on our volumes.
The main non-GAAP adjustments are combination and restructuring charges totaling about $10 million and a $38 million non-cash impairment charge in Q1 to reflect the writedown of our Houghton trademark indefinite-lived intangible assets to their estimated fair value.
This analysis continues to show that we took share in the marketplace as we estimate total organic volume growth due to net share gains was approximately 2% in the first quarter of this year versus the first quarter of last year.
Despite the challenges we faced in Q1, the Company generated good cash flow and adjusted EBITDA, which was up 10% on a pro forma basis and non-GAAP earnings per share of $1.38 was well above consensus of $1.
Concerning gross margins, you may recall from our comments in the past that the combined gross margins of Quaker Houghton were expected to be about 1% lower than stand-alone Quaker.
On a pro forma basis, as if Houghton was also in Q1 of 2019, net sales were down 3%, which reflects negative impacts from lower volumes and foreign exchange, partially offset by additional sales from Norman Hay.
In non-operating items, we reported a non-cash charge of $22.7 million for final settlement and termination of legacy Quaker's U.S. defined benefit pension plan, a process we previously disclosed.
In the table on Slide 8, you can see a reported operating loss of $12.4 million in the GAAP section but in non-GAAP operating income of $36 million in the middle section.
Overall, we estimate that COVID-19 impacted our sales by about 4% in the first quarter.
For 2020, our new estimate is $53 million of cost synergies achieved versus our previous estimate of $35 million.
So, while our actual sales are up significantly to $378.6 million in Q1, this is due to the inclusion of Houghton and Norman Hay.