Average sales price was also up about 17%, largely due to strong results in our Beef segment, the mix benefit from retail volume and the partial recovery of raw material inflation in net sales price.
We delivered growth in the retail channel along all reporting segments, which in aggregate accounted for more than $1 billion in sales improvement over the year-to-date period and more than $300 million in the third quarter versus the respective comparable periods.
12 consecutive quarters of retail share gains in our core business lines is driven by strength of our brands, along with solid execution from our team.
We delivered strong operating earnings performance, resulting in approximately $1.4 billion in operating income for the quarter.
Our rate of outside meat purchases has declined 25% versus last quarter and will continue to decline as hatch rates and utilization improve.
Sales improved 25% in third quarter and 8% year-to-date, reflecting improved volumes, which were up 10% for the quarter and flat year-to-date.
Fiscal year-to-date operating income was negatively impacted by $410 million of higher feed ingredient costs, as well as $210 million of increased grow-out expenses and outside meat purchases.
On a comparative basis, SG&A benefited from the $56 million loss in the year-to-date fiscal 2020 period as compared to a $55 million gain in the first quarter of fiscal 2021 associated with the cattle supplier incident.
Moving to foodservice, sales improved by approximately $1.3 billion in the third quarter, leading to a year-to-date improvement for the channel of nearly $1 billion compared to the same period last year.
Exports were up over 18% versus the comparable period, led by Beef, where sales improved by more than $350 million on a year-to-date basis.
Pricings improved nearly 16% in the quarter versus the comparable period last year.
Operating income was $27 million in the third quarter and $137 million on a fiscal year-to-date basis, both stronger than comparable periods a year ago.