The consolidated GAAP operating margin in the quarter was 24.8% compared to 22.7% in the prior year period, while the consolidated adjusted operating margin was 25.2% in the quarter compared to 23.5% in the prior year period.
Overall, we achieved revenue growth in the quarter of 2% on a reported and constant currency basis, which was driven by 15% growth in digital and 31% growth in Business Solutions.
Profitability was strong, with operating margin increasing to approximately 25%, as a result of solid Business Solutions revenue growth and lower planned marketing investments, which was partially offset as we continued to invest in our technology and global omnichannel platform.
Year-to-date, our cross-border principal increased 19%, reflecting the elevated levels of support that our customers provide to their loved ones during the period of uneven economic recovery.
GAAP earnings per share or earnings per share was $0.57 in the quarter compared to $0.55 in the prior year period, while adjusted earnings per share was $0.63 in the quarter compared to $0.57 in the prior year period.
B2C transactions declined 1% for the quarter as the slow recovery from COVID-19 impacted retail money transfer, partially offset by 19% transaction growth in digital money transfer.
Currency translation net of the impact from hedges benefited third quarter revenues by approximately $3 million compared to the prior year.
Both principal per transaction and cross-border principal increased approximately 4% during the quarter.
Key to our success, whether serving our direct consumers through our branded offering of -- or serving the customers of our partners is our omnichannel capabilities, which enable payouts to more than 200 countries and territories in over 130 currencies through our extensive global network of billions of bank accounts, millions of wallets and cards, and approximately 600,000 retail locations.
Our real-time account payout capabilities, currently available in over 100 countries, improve on incumbent solutions while also providing choice for consumers who preferred to direct transfer to our agent network.