M.D.C. Holdings posted another quarter of strong operating results, highlighted by year-over-year home sales revenue growth of 33%, homebuilding operating margin expansion of 370 basis points and net income growth of 96%.
Homebuilding operating margin improved by 370 basis points from the prior year quarter, resulting in a 109% increase in pre-tax income from our homebuilding operations to $101.7 million.
These results underscore the excellent homebuilding fundamentals we are currently experiencing across our markets and demonstrate our ability to grow our operations while continuing to improve our profit margins.
Net new order growth for the quarter increased 73% as compared to last year on a sales pace of 6.1 homes per community per month.
According to the National Association of Realtors, total housing inventory at the end of September totaled 1.4 million units, which was down 19% from a year ago and represents less than a three-month supply of homes.
Homes delivered increased 25% year-over-year to 2,147, driven by an increase in the number of homes we had in backlog to start the quarter, and to a lesser extent, an increase in our backlog conversion rate.
Homebuyers of all ages are looking for value when it comes to buying a home, and we have found ways to accommodate the desires through more efficient floor plans, while the combination of lower rates and pandemic-related buying has spurred demand across all product types, we believe the more affordable segments of the market will be the most resilient over time.
The increase was the result of price increases implemented across the majority of our communities over the past 12 months, as well as a shift in the mix of homes closed from Nevada to Southern California.
We continued to demonstrate solid operating leverage during the third quarter as our SG&A expense as a percentage of home sale revenues decreased 200 basis points year-over-year to 10.4%.
Supplementing the demand we've experienced as the pandemic, is the demographic shift toward home buying that we believe will serve as the tailwind for industry moving forward.
Our total dollar SG&A expense for the 2020 third quarter increased $10.9 million year-over-year, mostly due to variable commissions and marketing expenses that increased in line with our 33% increase in home sale revenues during the period.
The average selling price of our net orders increased by 10% year-over-year, driven by price increases implemented over the past 12 months, as well as a shift in mix to California, which has our highest average price.