These factors, combined with pricing discipline and continuous improvements to our value-added processing capabilities, enabled us to achieve our second consecutive year of record annual gross profit margins at 31.5%, up 120 basis points from 2019 and exceeding our estimated sustainable range of 28% to 30%.
Supported by solid demand and rising input costs, metal pricing improved as mill price increases for many of the products we sell accelerated throughout the fourth quarter with prices for certain carbon steel products almost doubling, which led to our average selling price increasing 4.6% compared to the third quarter of 2020, again, exceeding our expectations.
Our record gross profit margin reflects the outstanding performance by our managers in the field who effectively implemented price increases at the time of mill announcement prior to receiving the higher-cost metal into inventory, pushing our gross profit margin above already strong levels, resulting from our focus on higher-margin orders.
For the full year, we generated non-GAAP earnings per share of $7.71 as a result of the combination of strong margin discipline and effective expense control, which helped mitigate our decline in profitability.
Fueled by our ongoing focus on rightsizing our inventory to reflect current demand levels and our differentiating advantage of cross-selling inventory among our family of companies, we achieved our companywide inventory turn goal of 4.7 times based on tons for 2020.
The favorable demand and pricing conditions in the fourth quarter contributed to our record gross profit margin of 33%, a 60 basis point improvement from the third quarter of 2020.
Despite the extraordinary challenges 2020 presented on a global scale, we are extremely pleased with the strong execution of our team -- that our team has shown, not only in the field, but by all of the employees within the family of companies, who demonstrated the true resiliency of the Reliance business model.
On the heels of a record year in 2019, we maintained strong cash flow from operations of $1.17 billion in 2020 driven by our profitability and focus on working capital management.
Demand for the toll processing services we provide to the automotive market was strong, with activity back to pre-pandemic levels in the fourth quarter as automotive OEMs and steel and aluminum mills continued to ramp production as a result of reopenings following COVID-19 shutdowns in the second quarter of 2020.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, healthy demand conditions in the majority of our end markets resulted in our tons sold declining only 1.3% compared to the prior quarter.
And on a non-GAAP FIFO basis, which we believe is the best measure of our day-to-day operating performance, our gross profit margin of 33.6% increased 180 basis points from 31.8% in the third quarter of 2020.
While we are very pleased with our record Q4 and full year gross profit margin, we continue to believe our estimated sustainable gross profit margin range of 28% to 30% is appropriate as we navigate the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and operate through this uncertain environment.