As a result, we plan to accelerate our pace of new store openings for pOpshelf in 2021 and expect to incorporate this concept into a number of our larger format Dollar General locations as we look to capitalize on the significant growth opportunity we see for this differentiated concept.
Notably, on average, our DGP and new store formats are outperforming the chain on a comp sales basis and have considerably higher sales volumes compared to both the traditional and DGTP store, which bodes well for the future as we look to increase their unit counts in the years ahead.
At the same time, we remain focused on advancing our operating priorities and strategic initiatives as we continue to meet the evolving needs of our customers and further position Dollar General for long-term sustainable growth.
Of note, this represents our 11th consecutive quarter of year-over-year comp sales growth in our combined non-consumable categories, which we believe speaks to the strong and sustained momentum in these product categories.
Beginning later this year, this new format along with our DGP concept will become our base prototype for nearly all new stores, replacing both our traditional and higher, cooler count DGTP format, allowing for a more optimized assortment and room to accommodate future growth.
These factors were partially offset by: increased transportation and distribution costs, which were impacted by increased volume, some of which is attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as higher transportation rates and discretionary employee bonus expense for our distribution center and private fleet employees.
First, we plan to further the rollout of several value-creating initiatives, including our non-consumables initiative, Fast Track and the completion of our initial rollout of DG Fresh.
We are also pleased to highlight key changes to our development strategy, including plans to build on the success of our Dollar General Plus Store or DGP, and the introduction of two new store formats, which we began testing in 2020.
In total, we invested approximately $248 million in response to the pandemic in 2020, including about $167 million in appreciation bonuses for eligible front-line employees to demonstrate our appreciation for their exceptional performance during an incredibly challenging year.
With this in mind, we currently expect the following for 2021: net sales in the range of a 2% decline to flat; a same-store sales decline of 4% to 6% but which reflects growth of approximately 10% to 12% on a two-year stack basis; and earnings per share in the range of $8.80 to $9.50, which reflects a compound annual growth rate between 15% and 20% or between 14% and 19% on an adjusted basis over a two-year period, which is well above our long-term goal of delivering at least 10% annual earnings per share growth on an adjusted basis.
Finally, we are pleased to provide an update on a number of our new small box store opportunities we see available in the Continental United States, which represents an increase compared to our prior estimate.
Gross profit as a percentage of sales was 32.5% in the fourth quarter, an increase of 77 basis points, which represents our seventh consecutive quarter of year-over-year gross margin rate expansion.
The benefit from higher sales was partially offset by approximately $96 million or 110 basis points of incremental investments that we made in response to the pandemic, including approximately $69 million in appreciation bonuses for eligible frontline employees and additional measures taken to further protect our employees and customers.