Included in GAAP results in the recent quarter were after-tax expenses from the amortization of intangible assets amounting to $2 million or $0.02 per common share, little change from the prior quarter.
Credit trends are stable to improving, illustrated by net charge-offs, about half our long-term average, a modest reserve release and little change in the level of nonaccrual loans.
Consistent with our long-term practice, M&T provides supplemental reporting of its results on a net operating or tangible basis from which we have only ever excluded the after-tax effect of amortization of intangible assets, as well as any gains or expenses associated with mergers and acquisitions.
Higher income from PPP loans accounted for the majority of the $25 million quarter-over-quarter increase in net interest income and the second round of PPP loans began to receive forgiveness from the Small Business Administration.
On a GAAP basis, M&T's third-quarter results produced an annualized rate of return on average assets of 1.28% and an annualized return on average common equity of 12.16%.
Revenue in our fee generating businesses was particularly strong including mortgage banking, trust and brokerage and payments.
Largely offsetting that was the higher income from PPP loans both scheduled amortization and accelerated recognition of fees from forgiven loans, which added an estimated 10 basis points to the margin.
Compared with the second quarter of 2021, average interest earning assets increased by 3%, reflecting a 22% increase in money market placements, primarily cash on deposit with the Fed and a 3% decline in investment securities.
Balance decreases due to normal prepayments and principal amortization, including the Hudson City portfolio, drove some of the decrease, as well as repooling of loans previously purchased from Ginnie Mae servicing pools, offset -- those were offset by retention of new loan production, which will be a bigger factor in the fourth quarter.
Net income for the quarter was $495 million, compared with $458 million in the linked quarter and $372 million in the year-ago quarter.