In addition, we experienced a few other impacts in the quarter, higher raw material costs, mostly caustic in the Alumina segment and carbon products in smelting, higher energy costs in Europe and to a lesser extent in Brazil were unfavorable by $71 million.
We've significantly improved our processes, we've strengthened our balance sheet, we've reshaped our portfolio, we responded to societies need for responsible production launching the industry's most comprehensive portfolio of low-carbon products, and we've also certified many of our assets to the stringent standards of the Aluminum Stewardship Initiative.
The $110 million increase in adjusted EBITDA excluding special items was driven by higher metal prices as well as favorable currencies, slightly higher Alumina prices and better product pricing in Alumina and Aluminum.
Return on equity increased to 30.2% for the first nine months of 2021, nine month 2021 free cash flow less non-controlling interest distributions was negative $51 million due to the second quarter's $500 million pension funding, but was positive $320 million in the third quarter due to the strong EBITDA, partially offset by a three-day increase in days working capital.
Cash declined $200 million to $1.45 billion, our largest single outlay was $518 million in September when we redeemed the 2026 bonds, followed by working capital use of $206 million, $83 million of capital expenditures and a modest $19 million of pension and OPEB funding which is mostly OPEB.
However, at the San Ciprian refinery and smelter, the current high energy costs in the country and the strike if both persists through the quarter end are expected to be primary factors decreasing adjusted EBITDA approximately $100 million sequentially and increasing working capital sequentially $120 million.
Third quarter earnings per share was $1.76 per share, $0.13 per share higher than the prior quarter and $2.02 per share higher than the year ago quarter.
Adjusted EBITDA, excluding special items also increased, up 18% sequentially to $728 million, much higher than last year's $284 million.
In the first nine months of 2021, the Aluminum segment has had its best year so far, with nearly $1.4 billion or 73% of Alcoa's total adjusted EBITDA, excluding special items of $1.9 billion.
The Alumar restart that will be powered by renewable energy, the joint development project for high purity alumina and our net-zero ambition.
For the fourth quarter, overall with Alumar refinery production returning close to normal operating levels and if current Aluminum and Alumina index pricing levels persist, we expect another record-setting quarter.
Now with Aluminum prices remaining at post global financial crisis highs and Alumina prices recovering nicely, earnings should be even better in the fourth quarter.
For Bauxite shipments, the expected ranges are decreasing 1 million tons to 49 million tons to 50 million tons due to the Alumar unloader outage in the third quarter.