We protected our people, we found a way to run the plants and warehouses safely, we set production and shipping records, we figured out how to make hand sanitizer in our U.K. plant, we operated the company with 2,000 remote employees, we pivoted our marketing messages to support a 60% increase in e-commerce sales, we installed the new packaging lines with the assistance of off-site engineers using Google classes, we added overflow warehouses, and we validated new suppliers and co-manufacturers.
About half of our consumer business is in household and half is in personal care and we have a small specialty products business, which is a combination of bulk sodium bicarbonate and animal productivity products.
We've got a long runway on U.S. power brands going global, a number of acquisitions with very low household penetration versus their lead markets, and enormous opportunity in emerging markets where we've just started opening new offices to help us reach these consumers and a number of strategic investments in resources and capabilities like e-commerce and pricing to help make sure our great international team is working as efficiently and effectively as possible to drive profitable growth long into the future.
And Steve is going to introduce Barry Bruno, who has been with the company for a number of years and he has been Steve's right-hand man in growing the international business.
From an acquisition standpoint, our distributor coverage in 130 plus markets gives us a great footprint for expansion and we've been making excellent headway on new acquisitions like Waterpik and Flawless, but we're also still making excellent progress on some of our older acquisitions like Batiste and our VMS brands.
What this number won't capture is the households who got additional cats and as consumers want to spend more time with their cat instead of going to stores, we have seen a significant increase in online sales, which are not captured in these Nielsen sales.
Number one, self-care at home for our hair care and removal hair businesses like Nair and Flawless, cat ownership for Cat Litter, higher consciousness of germs and cleanliness benefiting ARM & HAMMER, OxiClean, XTRA but also Kaboom, and four, awareness trend with a regular daily intake of supplements, Vitafusion, L'il Critters and Viviscal will benefit, and Waterpik for gum health.
Four categories will stay on elevated levels, five categories will come down from COVID peaks but some to higher levels, five categories will bounce back from COVID impact, three categories will be steady.