Adjusted EBIT decreased 13% compared to prior year, to $267 million driven by lower sales volume, including the impact of the additional week in the prior year quarter and a lower adjusted gross margin, partially offset by lower adjusted marketing and selling expenses and lower adjusted administrative expenses.
The decline reflected lower adjusted gross margin and lower sales volume, including the impact of prior year's additional week, partially offset by lower adjusted marketing and selling expenses and higher adjusted other income.
The remaining impact was driven by higher other supply chain costs largely due to last year's manufacturing cost efficiencies related to a higher production levels to service the elevated demand, as well as lower mark-to-market gains on outstanding commodity hedges, partially offset by lower COVID-19 related costs.
Turning to Slide 19 for the fourth quarter organic net sales, which excludes the impact from the additional week and the impact of the sale of the Plum baby food and snacks business declined 4% as we cycled both the elevated demand in food purchases for at-home consumption, and a partial retailer inventory recovery in the prior year.
For the full year, I'm pleased to report that Campbell's organic net sales were comparable to fiscal 2020 and grew 3% on a two-year compounded annual growth basis driven by both divisions, reflecting strong end market performance.
However, we also anticipate our effective pricing actions, supply chain productivity programs and cost savings initiatives to be significant offsets, resulting in an improvement in the second half of the fiscal year relative to the prior year and exiting fiscal 2022 with momentum, as we continue to make progress on our strategic plan.
Our 4th quarter organic net sales decline of 9% and end market performance of minus 2% reflects cycling the partial inventory recovery and elevated consumption levels in the prior-year quarter.
In the fourth quarter, we delivered solid results ahead of our expectations across all three key metrics: net sales, adjusted EBIT and adjusted EPS, and addressed the executional pressures we experienced last quarter.
The third quarter reflected the challenging comparisons to the prior year as we cycle the demand surge that accompanied the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic and navigated several headwinds, including increased inflation and executional pressures in our Snacks division.
The organic net sales decline was driven by a 5 points headwind due to volume declines, partially offset by favorable price and sales allowances and lower promotional spending, which each drove a 1 point gain in the quarter.