Our board will continue to evaluate our dividend and capital allocation strategy including our plan capital expenditures with a goal of targeting a minimum of $75 million to $100 million in net debt repayment in 2021 and annually thereafter.
The U.S. Marshals Service contracts for bed capacity which is generally located in areas near the federal courthouses to house pre-trial offenders who have been charged with federal crimes under the laws passed by Congress.
More recently, the president issued an executive order directing the attorney general to not renew DOJ contracts with privately operated criminal detention facilities.
As we have previously disclosed, the Federal Bureau of Prisons has decided that it will not renew our contracts for the D. Ray James, Georgia; Rivers, North Carolina; and Moshannon Valley, Pennsylvania facilities due to the decline in the federal prison populations more recently as a result of the COVID pandemic.
Our GEO care segment has also been impacted by lower occupancy levels across our reentry centers, day reporting programs, and youth services facilities due to COVID-19.
Due to the decline in the overall federal population, we have previously announced that the Federal Bureau of Prisons had decided not to renew three of our BOP contracts that are scheduled to expire during the first quarter of 2021.
Despite these challenges, we believe our company remains resilient and is underpinned by long-term real estate assets and supported by contracts entailing essential government services.
While we continue to monitor the scope and implementation timeline for this order, we have assumed that it could result in additional nonrenewals of our BOP contracts in 2021 and coming years and we have incorporated this assumption into our guidance.
We've provided these essential services to government agencies at the federal and state levels under both Democratic and Republican administrations and during times when either party has been in control of the legislative branch of the government.
Today, we reported fourth-quarter revenues of approximately $578 million and net income attributable to GEO of $0.09 per diluted share.