I believe that the progress we made in the second quarter, both with our financial results and with our initiatives to better position the Company for the future, demonstrates our team's strong leadership, their relentless hard work and their amazing commitment to our customers and our Company.
Our e-commerce business in North America and Europe delivered high single-digit revenue growth during the second quarter, and gross profit dollars grew more than 20% as margins improved significantly as a result of increased full price selling and improved IMUs.
While we reduced marketing spend dramatically during the second quarter, we see an opportunity to increase our investment in the second half of the year to continue to strengthen our brand position and drive traffic.
Our retail sales were better than originally anticipated, and our wholesale businesses, which also performed better than expected, benefited from some product shipments pull-forward from the third quarter into the second quarter as many European customers requested products earlier than expected.
Improved visibility is helping us size our expected demand more effectively, and as a result, we can project our inventory needs more accurately, which is key to optimizing future sales, margins and profitability.
We are confident that our e-commerce business will accelerate in the second half of the year as we increase our investment in marketing, continue to reposition our product offering and complete our Salesforce platform implementation.
Almost across the board, we have seen a significant reduction in customer traffic from the comparable prior-year period, partially offset by the improved conversion rates.
Improved visibility helped us to better assess our liquidity, enabling us to capitalize on share repurchases that we think offer a material long-term return opportunity for our shareholders.
We continue to make inventory management a key strategic initiative and made good progress this quarter as we experienced a product margin increase and our inventories are in a good place.
As we look into the second half of the year, we expect a slow recovery of our retail business, driven by similar metrics to those that we have seen since we have reopened our stores, but with a gradual improvement in customer traffic.