Refrigerated food segment profit declined by 16%, due to lower foodservice sales, a significant decline in commodity, profitability and increased supply chain expenses due to COVID-19, profitability was also impacted by one-time start-up expenses related to our new plant in Omaha.
Jim Snee will provide a review of the Company's current and future operating conditions, commentary regarding each segment's performance for the quarter and update on the impact to the company of the COVID-19 pandemic and a perspective on the balance of fiscal 2021.
The performances of MegaMex, Wholly, SKIPPY, Applegate, Justin's, Ceratti, Fontanini, Columbus and Sadlers give us a high level of confidence in our ability to successfully integrate, operate and grow the Planters business.
Jennie-O Turkey Store segment profit declined 30%, lower foodservice sales increased supply chain costs related to the COVID-19 pandemic and higher freight expenses were key drivers to the lower profitability.
Most encouraging was the sales growth we saw from the Jennie-O brand every major retail category, including Jennie-O lean ground, turkey burgers, Oven Ready items, Bacon and marinated meats grew.
Incremental supply chain costs related to COVID-19 of $15 million were the primary reason for a $13 million decline in pre-tax earnings.
We saw a positive signs of recovery in foodservice this quarter even as the business declined 17%, compared to last year, due to the continued impacts of the pandemic on the industry.
Our team generated strong top line growth with sales increasing 3% to a record $2.5 billion all four segments delivered sales growth and achievement that hasn't been accomplished since 2016.
Brands such as SPAM, SKIPPY, Hormel chili, Hormel Black Label, Applegate, Hormel pepperoni, Lloyd Hormel fully cooked entrees and Justin's all delivered very strong growth.
Net earnings and diluted earnings per share declined 9%, due primarily to incremental supply chain costs and higher tax expense.
The addition of this iconic brand in high-margin business continues our evolution as a global branded food company, moving us further away from a commodity-oriented meat-centric company.
We increased production levels this quarter through a combination of improving efficiencies; bringing on new capacity and further leveraging our strategic supply chain partners.
We have many leading brands that Hormel and the acquisition of the Planters snack nut business will be an excellent addition to our Company.
As in prior quarters, we continue to strike a balance between the consumer demand we are seeing and our supply chains ability to meet that demand.