Personal Health Care up double-digits; Fabric Care grew high-singles; Baby Care, Feminine Care and Grooming up mid-singles; Home Care, Oral Care, Hair Care and Skin and Personal Care organic sales each up low-single-digits.
The July to September quarter provides a good start to the fiscal year, putting us on track to deliver our guidance for organic sales growth, core earnings per share growth, free cash flow productivity and cash returned to shareholders.
We experienced the full impact of rising commodity and transportation costs this quarter, but healthy top-line growth and strong cost savings kept earnings per share growth nearly in line with the prior year.
On a currency neutral basis, core earnings per share declined 3% mainly due to gross margin pressure from higher input costs, which we highlighted in our initial outlook for the year.
So moving to first quarter results, organic sales grew 4%, volume contributed two points of sales growth, pricing and mix each added one point.
Our team continues to operate with excellence and stay focused on the near-term priorities and long-term strategies that enabled us to create strong momentum prior to the COVID crisis and to make our business even stronger since the crisis began.
Earnings growth should improve sequentially through the balance of the fiscal year as price increases go into effect and productivity programs ramp up.
Greater China organic sales were in line with prior year due to strong growth in the base period comp and due to intra-quarter softness in beauty market growth.
Higher commodity and freight cost impacts combined were a 400 basis point hit to gross margins, mix was an 80 basis points headwind, primarily due to geographic impacts.
The strategic need for investment to continue to strengthen the superiority of our brands, the short-term need to manage through this challenging cost environment and the ongoing need to drive balanced top and bottom line growth, including margin expansion, underscore the importance of ongoing productivity.
Growth was broad-based across business units with nine out of 10 product categories growing organic sales.