Speaker :: Josh Hirsberg -- Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer


Thank you, Tom.
Good afternoon, everyone, and welcome to our second quarter conference call.
Joining me on the call this afternoon is Keith Smith, our President and Chief Executive Officer.
Our comments today will include statements that are private -- forward-looking statements within the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act.
All forward-looking statements in our comments are as of today's date, and we undertake no obligation to update or revise the forward-looking statements.

Actual results may differ materially from those projected in any forward-looking statement.
There are certain risks and uncertainties, including those disclosed in our filings with the SEC that may impact our results.
During our call today, we will make reference to non-GAAP financial measures.
For a complete reconciliation of historical non-GAAP to GAAP financial measures, please refer to our earnings press release and our Form 8-K furnished to the SEC today and both of which are available in the Investors section of our website at boydgaming.com.

We do not provide a reconciliation of forward-looking non-GAAP financial measures due to our inability to project special charges and certain expenses.
Today's call is also being webcast live at boydgaming.com and will be available for replay in the Investor Relations section of our website shortly after the completion of this call.

So with that, I'd now like to turn the call over to Keith Smith.
Keith?





Speaker :: Keith E. Smith -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Josh, and good afternoon, everyone.
The second quarter was another outstanding performance by our company and our entire team.
Our transformed operating model and enhanced capabilities delivered record results as our business continues to strengthen.
On a companywide basis, we achieved record EBITDAR of more than $385 million, up 66% from the second quarter of 2019 and record EBITDAR margins of just over 43%.

And for the first time since the pandemic began, gaming revenues surpassed 2019 levels.
In our Las Vegas Locals segment, EBITDAR rose 87% over 2019 levels as margins approached 57%.
And in our core locals business, which excludes our closed properties in the tourism-dependent Orleans, we grew EBITDAR by nearly 107% over 2019 levels with an operating margin of more than 58%.
Downtown Las Vegas, our two open properties, the California and the Fremont, each set all-time record for EBITDAR and operating margins during the quarter.

Combined, they grew EBITDAR by 24% over 2019, with margins exceeding 45%.
And in the Midwest & South segment, EBITDAR topped 2019 levels by nearly 58% with margins of 42%.
All 26 of our open properties achieved EBITDAR growth over the second quarter of 2019 with 25 properties growing EBITDAR at double-digit rates.
While our second quarter results were strengthened by the impact of government stimulus, improving vaccination rates and the easing of COVID restrictions, the strong operating performance from the first half of the year has continued into July.

Today, our cost structure is more streamlined, our marketing investment is more targeted, and we are successfully driving play from our most valuable customers.
And while there is a bit more uncertainty today surrounding the direction of the pandemic, we are confident in our ability to continue performing well above our pre-COVID levels as we continue to successfully execute our operating philosophy.

This operating philosophy has continued to deliver significant results since we reopened last year, but the real planning and implementation of many of these initiatives began before the pandemic.
We have been investing in new technology capabilities and analytics for several years now, all aimed at gaining a better understanding of our customer base, building stronger customer relationships with our best guests and creating a more efficient operation.
Prior to COVID, we were seeing encouraging results from these investments with solid growth in EBITDAR and margins across our operations.

These positive results continue to accelerate as we reopened our business last year.
Since reopening, we have delivered consistent sequential growth in play and visitation from our core customers as we realize enhanced operating efficiencies throughout our business.
The proven success of this business model is why we are optimistic we can maintain much of our region margin improvements in the long term.
Beyond the ongoing growth we are delivering from our core operations, we continue to pursue initiatives to further expand and enhance our business.

One area of focus is the continued implementation of new technology to improve the customer experience.
BoydPay, our cashless digital wallet, is an example of that technology.
We are making good progress rolling out BoydPay, which is now active at five properties and should be live at 21 properties by year-end pending regulatory approvals.
After successfully connecting the BoydPay wallet to our slot floors, we are now focused on expanding its capabilities.

We will be launching a test program for non-gaming amenities in Nevada this week, followed by table games later this year.
The customer response to BoydPay has been encouraging with our core customers recognized in convenience of a cashless gaming experience.
As a result, we believe that BoydPay will be another key enhancement to our ongoing focus on building stronger relationships with our guests.
Turning to the digital gaming space.

Our Stardust branded online casinos are off to an excellent start in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, exceeding our expectations for player volumes and revenues since our launch in mid-April.
Our sports betting partnership with FanDuel also continues to perform well.
After successfully establishing partnerships with FanDuel in Pennsylvania, Indiana, Iowa, Illinois and Mississippi, we are now setting our sights on new opportunities in Louisiana, and we are optimistic we will be able to launch FanDuel retail and mobile sports books in that state before the end of the year.

Our relationship with FanDuel continues to generate value for our shareholders, both through our revenue sharing arrangement as well as the significant value of our 5% equity stake in FanDuel Group.
Based on our strong performance so far this year, we remain firmly on track to generate more than $20 million in EBITDAR from sports betting and interactive gaming this year.
While digital gaming is an attractive growth opportunity for our company, we're also pursuing strategic opportunities to expand our traditional gaming operations.

Our partnership with the Wilton Rancheria Tribe near Sacramento, California is just one example.
Steel is in the ground at the Sky River Casino site, team member recruitment is underway, and we are on time and on budget with the construction of this resort, which will include 2,000 slot machines, 80 table games and 12 food and beverage offerings.
We share the tribe's excitement for the tremendous potential of this resort and look forward to opening Sky Rivers doors early in the fourth quarter of next year.

As construction on Sky River continues, we are also evaluating opportunities to reinvest in our existing operations.
One of these opportunities is Treasure Chest, which has long been a strong performer in our regional portfolio.
We are currently in the planning phase of developing a land-based facility at Treasure Chest, which will significantly enhance the guest experience of this property.
Finally, before concluding, I want to provide an update on the company's ongoing ESG initiatives.

Sharing our success with others and investing in stronger communities have always been our core values of our company.
And those tenants remain as important to us as the day we were founded.
We have been fortunate this company to recover so quickly after last year's closures.
But we are also well aware that there are many in our communities who are still struggling with the economic and social impacts of the pandemic, and we stand ready to help.

During the second quarter, Boyd Gaming provided nearly $1 million in cash donations to charities in the communities we serve across the Midwest and South.
Majority of these donations went toward organizations focused on food and security, which is a strategic priority of our ESG efforts.
These contributions follow a similar campaign we undertook in support of the Southern Nevada Community last year.
We are proud to work with our nonprofit partners across the country to assist our neighbors in need, and we will continue to step up for our communities in the months and years ahead.

So in conclusion, the second quarter was another remarkable performance for our company and our entire team.
Our nationwide portfolio continues to generate robust levels of EBITDAR and our operating strategy and tight focus on the right customer are producing the highest margins in our history.
And we believe that our strong performances since reopening are largely sustainable.

These achievements would not have been possible without the dedication and hard work of the entire Boyd Gaming team.
It would be difficult to overstate what a great job our thousands of team members have done over these past 12 months that have helped take our company to new heights of performance.
And to thank them in a meaningful way, Boyd Gaming awarded more than $10 million in onetime cash bonuses to our frontline team members in late June.

We have the best team members in the business, dedicated, hardworking and committed to providing memorable service to our guests.
It is a privilege to be part of such an incredible team and look forward to achieving continued success together.
Thank you for your time this afternoon.

I'd now like to turn the call over to Josh.
Josh?





Speaker :: Josh Hirsberg -- Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer and Treasurer


Thanks, Keith.
The second quarter was obviously an outstanding one for our company.
Keith noted the company EBITDAR and margin records as well as the all-time individual property records that were established during the quarter.
But we know the key question is whether the strong performances that we have been delivering are sustainable.
And we believe the answer is yes.

We can maintain much of the margin and EBITDAR performance that we have been -- we have achieved reopening our properties.
This confidence stems from the fundamental and recurring drivers of these results over the last 12 months.
That is our more efficient business model, our ability to more effectively target our core customer and the consistency we have seen in our customer base.
While Q2 was strengthened in part by government stimulus, the easing of restrictions and progress made rolling out vaccines, our fundamental customer trends have been consistent since we reopened last year, and these trends have continued into July.

As a result of our strong operating performance and careful management of capital expenditures, we are in a much stronger financial position today than pre-COVID.
We have less debt, more free cash flow and lower leverage.
Our leverage at the end of the second quarter was 3.1 times and lease-adjusted leverage was 3.6 times.
During the quarter, we refinanced nearly $1.5 billion in senior notes with a combination of new notes and excess cash, allowing us to reduce interest expense on an annualized basis by nearly $50 million.

We generated over $160 million in free cash flow during the second quarter after capital expenditures of $52 million.
We expect capital expenditures for the year to be approximately $200 million.
Due to continued uncertainty with the pandemic, in the near term, we will remain prudent with respect to our capital plans and the use of our free cash flow, while maintaining a strong, flexible balance sheet.
As a result, we expect our leverage to continue to strengthen through the remainder of this year.

So with the completion of the first half of the year and initial insight into Q3, we believe we have established the new normal for operating our business.
Going forward, we expect EBITDAR and margins to be higher than pre-COVID levels, resulting in a much stronger balance sheet, providing enhanced flexibility to grow our company and create long-term value for our shareholders.

Tom, that concludes our prepared remarks, and we're now ready to take any questions.





