Speaker :: David I. Goldberg -- Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer


Thank you.
Good afternoon and welcome to the Beazer Homes conference call discussing our results for the fourth quarter and full year of fiscal 21.
Before we begin, you should be aware that during this call, we will be making forward-looking statements.
Such statements involve known unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors described in our SEC filings, which may cause actual results to differ materially from our projections.
Any forward looking-statements speaks only as of the date the statement is made.
We do not undertake any obligation to update or revise any forward looking statement, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
New factors emerge from time to time, it is simply not possible to predict all such factors.
Joining me today is Allan Merrill, our Chairman and Chief Executive Officer.
On our call today, our review highlights from fiscal 21, outline our objectives for fiscal '22 and provide an update on our ESG initiatives.
I will then cover our full year results in greater depth, our expectations for the first quarter and the full fiscal year and update our outlook for continued growth in our land position and community count.
My comments will be followed by a wrap up by Alan.
After our prepared remarks, we'll take questions in the time remaining.







Speaker :: Allan P. Merrill -- Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer


Thank you, Dave.
And thank you for joining us on our call this afternoon.
In the beginning of last year, we established three strategic objectives for fiscal '21 related to our profitability, block position and balance sheet As we progress through the year our performance continued to improve.
Now the year is over, I'm happy to report that we far exceeded our expectations for all three objectives.
First, we expected to slightly increase EBITDA and generate double digit earnings-per-share growth.
In fact, our EBITDA increased by nearly 30% and EPS more than doubled.
We were able to capitalize on a strong demand environment, while managing through the impacts of cost increases and supply chain disruptions.
And earnings further benefited from lower interest expense and energy efficient tax credits.
Second, we expected to grow our lat position.
At year end, our active lot opposition was up more than 25% versus the prior year.
Importantly, we also grew our share of lots controlled by option from about 35% to nearly 50%.
And third, we expected to reduce debt.
Over the course of the year, we retired more than $80 million of debt substantially improving our credit profile.
These outcomes are a result of our long standing balanced growth strategy, which is our multi year plan to grow profitability faster than revenue from a less leveraged and more efficient balance sheet.
Over the past five years, we have grown EBITDA at a double digit compound annual growth rate substantially faster than our revenue growth, reduced net debt to EBITDA from over seven times to about three times and increased return on equity by more than 15 points.
As we look forward to fiscal '22, there are industry and company specific factors that provide the basis for our confidence and highlight the risks which are influencing our operational priorities and expectations.
At an industry level, we believe the favorable conditions for housing are likely to endure beyond this year.

Strengthened demand is supported by demographics, a growing economy and rising household incomes.
But the supply of new homes is seriously constrained by entitlement restrictions, supply chain challenges, and labor shortages.
While this backdrop is generally positive, it also creates several risks.
First, supply constraints make us quite cautious about the likelihood of improvements to cycle times in fiscal '22.
In fact, we've pulled forward our cutoff dates for home starts scheduled to be closed this year.
Second, there are clearly affordability risks posed by rising home prices and the potential for higher mortgage rates.
To address this, we are obsessively committed to delivering extraordinary value to homebuyers through innovation, simplification and choice, among other strategies.
At a company level, we are encouraged by the dollar value and embedded profitability of our backlog, the continuing strength in our online and in person traffic and our ability to leverage overheads and further reduce interest expense.
With that background, I'd like to highlight some of our expectations for fiscal '22.
First, we expect to grow EBITDA by more than 10% leading to earnings per share above $5.
We are beginning fiscal '22 with approximately half of our expected closings for the year already in backlog, giving us visibility into profitability growth driven by higher ASPs and better margins.
Our deleveraging results will also contribute to lower interest expense.
Second, we expect double digit growth in our lot position, with lots controlled by options remaining around 50%.
Plan spending is expected to increase again this year although we remain highly disciplined in our underwriting.
Third, we expect to deliver a return on total equity of about 20% or nearly 25%, excluding our deferred tax assets.
And finally, we fully expect to achieve our long standing goal of reducing debt below $1 billion.
Looking beyond this year, we believe that we are positioning the company for more growth and more profitability, leading to higher returns and shareholders equity.

As we improve our financial and operational performance, we are also focused on creating additional value for stakeholders by extending our leadership position in ESG.
On the environmental side, we were pleased to be named an Energy Star Partner of the year for the sixth consecutive year.
And importantly, we continue to make improvements in our designs, materials and construction practices, In support of our industry first pledge to have every home we build designated as net zero energy ready by the end of 2025.
As part of this effort in fiscal '21, we committed to meeting the EPA rigorous standards for their Indoor airPLUS program.
On the social side, we've made significant progress on the rollout of charity title, our title business committed to contributing one 100% of its profits to charity.
In fiscal '22, we expect this expansion will allow us to donate more than $1 million allocated between our national philanthropic partner Fisher House, and other charities in the communities we serve.
Our process of partnering with charities aligns our financial contract contributions, with opportunities for both employee engagement and wellness.
These philanthropic efforts have added to employee satisfaction, and have been very well received by our trade partners and homebuyers.
Finally, on the governance side, our diverse and highly engaged board has earned high ratings from third party rating services.
But we aren't resting there.
Later this calendar year, we will publish our first ever Tear Sheet where we will provide substantial new ESG disclosures pursuant to the SASB framework for homebuilders.
If you're familiar with SASB, and the types of metrics and disclosure topics they favor, you'll know this has taken a significant effort to prepare, and it won't just be a glossy marketing report.
The bottom line is that we believe extending our ESG leadership position will provide real value for each of our stakeholders.
And we are excited about adopting new processes and products to enhance the sustainability and resiliency of our business.







Speaker :: David I. Goldberg -- Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer


Thanks, Alan.
Good afternoon, everyone.
Turning to slide nine, we outline the detailed results for fiscal '21.
In the appendix, we include a comparable slide highlighting results for the fourth quarter.
For the full fiscal year, we generated net income of $122 million, or just over $4 of earnings per share, which benefited from $12 million of energy efficient tax credits.
Excluding these tax credits, our earnings per share would have been $3.61, more than double the prior year.
Adjusted EBITDA was about $263 million, up nearly 30% versus the prior year.
Homebuilding revenue remained relatively flat versus the prior year, as the benefit from higher ASPs offset a modest decline in closings.
Gross margin, excluding amortized interest, impairments and abandonments was up about 200 basis points to 23%.
SG&A, as a percentage of total revenue decreased 50 basis points to 11.4%.
Interest amortize as percentage of homebuilding revenue was 4.1% down 40 basis points as we benefited from lower interest incurred, and our tax expense was about $22 million for an average annual tax rate of 15%.
This rate was lowered by energy efficient tax credits primarily related to homes close between fiscal '18 and fiscal '20.
Turning out our expectations for the first quarter of this fiscal year.
Average monthly sales pace should be in the high twos, which represents an increase relative to our historical first quarter average over the past five years.
Community count is expected to be around 115 essentially flat sequentially.
Closings should be between 1000, 1050 reflecting extended cycle times and our emphasis on delivering a spectacular customer experience.
ASP should be in high $430,000 range.
Gross Margin should be up between 125 and 150 basis points versus the same period last year.
SG& on an absolute dollar basis should be up about $4 million.
Land sale and other revenue should be about $7 million, with a margin of about 50%.

Within the ranges we provided for closes and margins, EBITDA should be above $50 million, or up around 15%.
Interest amortize as a percentage of homebuilding revenue should be in the mid threes and our tax rate should be approximately 25%.
While precision and EPS forecasting is difficult, we expect earnings per share to be up at least 50% versus the same period last year.
Looking forward to the full fiscal year, we expect to grow EBITDA by more than 10% in fiscal '22 and earn more than $5 per share.
Our improved profitability will be driven by the following factors, a significant increase in our average sales price to about $450,000 up over 10% versus fiscal 21, more than 100 basis points of operating margin improvement arising from a combination of increased gross margin and lower SG& as a percentage of total revenue and interesting amortize as a percentage of homebuilding revenue in the low 3% range as the benefit from our efforts to lower our cash interest expense continue to materialize.
We ended the fourth quarter with nearly $500 million of liquidity comprised of unrestricted cash of approximately $250 million and nothing outstanding on our revolver.
We have no significant maturities until 2025, and a clear path to bring debt below $1 billion in fiscal 22.
Our substantial deleveraging combined with higher earnings has led to significantly better credit metrics for our business.
This trend should continue as we move through fiscal '22.
And by year end, we anticipate our net debt to EBITDA will be in the low twos, and our net debt to net cap in the 40s.
In the appendix of this presentation, we provided a longer term view of our improvement in the statistics, which we've accomplished while growing the profitability of our business.
We spent over $245 million on land and development in the quarter, bringing our full year total spend to almost $600 million, up from less than 450 million in fiscal 2020.

This increased land spending combined with our efforts to increase the percentage of our lots control through options has allowed us to grow our active lot position to over 21,000 lawns.
Looking forward, we expect to again increase our spend on land acquisition and development in fiscal '22, which should generate at least 10% growth in our total lot position.
As you can see, on slide 12, we've already driven our total active lot positions back to a level that supported a much higher community count.
To further demonstrate the relationship between growth and our opposition in our community count.
On slide 13, we've shown this data on an index basis.
In addition, we've also lagged our community count by one year to roughly reflect the normal timing difference between controlling you lots and opening communities.
As you plan for community count is headed, there are a couple important things to consider.
In fiscal '21, the growth in our lot position was driven by the approval of more than 100 communities for acquisition.
This was about double the run rate of new community approvals in fiscal '19 and '20, and did not reflect any material change and community size.
But, as you would expect, the supply chain disruptions that we're experiencing, are also impacting the timing of land development activity.
As such, the lag we typically experience from the time of controlling new lots to activating new communities has extended and become less predictable.
Accordingly, we have very good visibility into a substantial lift in our community count, which will start later this year and accelerate during fiscal 23.
On a final note, our profitability expectations for fiscal '22 are not meaningfully dependent on new community openings.

With that, let me turn the call back over to Alan for his conclusion.





Speaker :: Allan P. Merrill -- Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks again, Dave.
Fiscal 21 was a very successful year, but it's in the rearview mirror.
And in fact, I'm even more excited about fiscal '22.
Here's why.
The housing market remains quite strong, with demographically driven demand, confronting structural supply constraints.
We have a terrific backlog to jump-start our year giving us visibility into improvements in pricing and margins to be realized in the near term.
We're also investing for the future with a growing but risk balanced land position, creating longer term growth opportunities.
We have the best balance sheet we've had more than a decade with far less debt and plenty of liquidity.
And we're expanding our capabilities across the entire spectrum of ESG resulting in clear, easily observed achievements.
Taken together these factors have is better positioned than ever, to create growing and durable value for shareholders, customers, partners and employees and positively impact every community where we operate.
Ultimately, credit for our results and our optimism about our future prospects is attributable to our team.
I am sincerely grateful for their dedication, their efforts, their resiliency, and their success.
That's why I remain confident we have the people the strategy and the resources to accomplish our goals in the coming years.







