Speaker :: Mark Brewer -- Director, Investor Relations


Thank you very much, Nick.
Good morning and thank you for taking the time to join our conference call this morning.
With me this morning are Joe Gatto, president and chief executive officer; Dr. Jeff Balmer, senior vice president and chief operating officer; and Kevin Haggard, senior vice president and chief financial officer.

During our prepared remarks, we'll be referencing the earnings result presentation along with the Delaware Basin acquisition presentation, both of which were posted yesterday afternoon to our website.
So I encourage everyone to download the presentations, if you haven't already.
You can find the slides on our events and presentations page located within the Investors section of our website at www.
callon.com.
Before we begin, I'd like to remind everyone to review our cautionary statements, disclaimers, and important disclosures included on Slide 2 of the earnings presentations and Slide 2 and 3 of the acquisition presentation.



We will make some forward-looking statements during today's call that refer to estimates and plans.
Actual results could differ materially due to the factors noted on these slides and in our periodic SEC filings.
We'll also refer to some non-GAAP financial measures today, which we believe help to facilitate comparisons across periods and with our peers.
For any non-GAAP measures we reference, we provide a reconciliation to the nearest corresponding GAAP measure.

You may find these reconciliations in the appendix to the earnings presentation slides and in our earnings press release, both of which are available on our website.
Following our prepared remarks we will open the call to Q&A related to both the quarterly results and our announced acquisition.
And at this point, I'd like to turn the call over to Joe Gatto.





Speaker :: Joe Gatto -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Mark.
Glad to have everyone join us for today's call.
As Mark mentioned, yesterday we announced the results from another very solid quarter, along with the next step forward in advancing our stated strategic initiatives.
The agreement to acquire the Primexx properties in the Southern Delaware Basin consolidates a high-quality asset base into our efficient life-of-field scale development model and increases our oil cut in the basin.

The consistent execution of lowering our capital and operating costs and delivering repeatable well results in the Delaware over the last three years makes this a logical addition to our core Delaware footprint, and we anticipate delivering similar performance and synergies across the expanded position of over 110,000 net acres.
This proven ability to capture value through the application of our operational model and knowledge base, creates upside for a transaction that already screens, is accretive across all metrics and is valued at attractive multiples relative to comparable recent deals.
In addition to the strategic merits, we will realize substantial financial benefits through a more robust free cash flow outlook and lower capital reinvestment rates that will complement the day one deleveraging impact of the acquisition from the addition of almost 20,000 BOE per day of production in the equity component of the consideration paid.
Along with the acquisition of the Primexx assets, we have agreed with Kimmeridge Energy for the exchange of approximately $200 million over 9% second lien senior notes into common shares, which will occur after the closing of the Primexx transaction.

This will require shareholder approval to issue incremental shares to a party that currently owns over 5% of our shares, and we've already secured approximately 30% of the majority of vote required.
Once complete, this additional step forward will reduce our cash interest expense, lower absolute total debt and senior secured debt balances and improve our leverage statistics.
Importantly, the combination of the exchange and the acquisition deliver a tremendous positive financial impact while also driving accretion across all key per-share metrics.
In the interest of having plenty of time for Q&A, we are going to forgo our normal process of walking through each of the earnings slides and speak to the higher-level points for the second quarter and layer in additional information around the acquisition beyond what is in the presentation materials and press release.

During the second quarter, our performance against plan was spot on with capital, production, operating expenses and G&A, all tracking in line to better than expected.
A relatively high level of completion activity throughout the second quarter has us off to a great start in July, with volumes increasing nearly 10% from June and our oil cut climbing as well.
We are planning to run approximately 3.5 rigs on our legacy acreage in the second half of the year as we position operations for a strong hand-off into 2022.
Based upon an expected early fourth-quarter close of the acquisition, we will fold in the activity from the current two rig program being executed by Primexx later this year.

Second-quarter cash margins continue to improve as the hedges that were required -- that we were required to enter into 2020 continue to roll off.
The addition of the Primexx assets will further bolster the oil content of our current Permian production and broader development in the Delaware, supporting strong operating cash margins and contributing to an increase in total corporate cash margins.
I'll touch on our ESG efforts and the highlights from our recently issued sustainability report before turning things over to Jeff for a discussion of operations.
2020 was a year of tremendous progress, making significant strides forward on emissions, flaring and safety.

Some select examples of our initiatives include working with outside vendors to improve compressor run times, reducing back pressure on the gathering systems, securing alternative offtake options for natural gas as a contingency in the event of a significant third-party facility constraint and an increase in our water recycling efforts, which will further benefit from the Primexx infrastructure base that will more than double our daily recycling capacity.
This will not only have a positive impact on our cost structure, but will also reduce the potential burden on local water resources as well.
Now, I'm going to turn things over to Jeff to discuss our current operations and offer some insights on the Primexx acquisition.





Speaker :: Jeff Balmer -- Senior Vice President and Chief Operating Officer


Great.
Good morning everyone, and thank you, Joe.
As Joe mentioned, we had a really solid operational quarter.
Our drilling team has continued to hold the line on costs and the outstanding drilling efficiency achieved, for instance, in the Eagle Ford during the first half of the year, is very much on par with our 2020 stats.

In the Midland Basin, we've seen significant improvement and more importantly, have been able to carry over the learnings from Howard County to our position in Midland County.
In the Delaware Basin, we continue to make progress on drilling lateral footage per day in both Reeves and Ward County.
This consistent improvement, coupled with the rapid progress we are seeing on the completion side, has us very excited about the future of our Delaware opportunities.
The second quarter was incredibly busy with completions.

And as previously mentioned, it materialized in the significant bump in production we're seeing in July.
With two full-time crews, an e-frac pad and one other spot crew, we were able to complete and turn to production 47 new wells.
Costs have continued to remain in check while we push for even better efficiency stats.
Again, the Delaware has been the area where we're making tremendous strides, with efficiency climbing every quarter and costs continuing to drop.

From the third quarter of 2019 until now, we've seen an almost 70% improvement in footage per day.
Those gains, along with an improved pricing environment, have lowered the cost per lateral foot more than 50%.
Those advancements have clearly improved the future value of our Delaware asset base.
And as we take those learnings and couple them with the best practices of the Primexx team, continue to refine and adjust our approach, we expect to produce even better wells with very high capital efficiency.

Speaking specifically about the acquisition, the current well results and manner in which the Primexx team has begun developing the acreage really places us in a very enviable position.
We have the opportunity to step into an infrastructure advantaged, highly contiguous position that has robust oily results throughout the acreage.
And importantly, we have the associated data to feed into our subsurface models, which has helped us map out the 300-plus core locations that immediately compete for capital in our development program.
This is high-quality inventory, and I'm speaking specifically about limiting it just to the primary zone, so there's other zones available.

But the primary zones have clear proof of development and repeatable results.
Equally as important is the ability to continue focusing on larger capital-efficient long lateral development projects.
So with roughly 85% of these core locations at 1.5 to 2 mile laterals, we can keep the cost per lateral foot low as we shift more of our activity over to the Delaware.
After our combination with Carrizo, we set out to uncover and exploit every available opportunity to improve our operations, lower costs and ensure predictability of our development results.

And I think you've seen that very clearly.
Our team is already looking to leverage our advanced understanding of spacing and stacking, implement our geologic and geomechanical models to optimize targeting and fractured geometry in these larger pad developments and, of course, optimize facilities to reduce potential downtime and flaring.
And of course, it also doesn't hurt to have a few extra rigs and completion teams running when we're talking to our vendor partners.
I'm going to turn things over to Kevin to discuss financials around the quarter and the transaction.





Speaker :: Kevin Haggard -- Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer


Thanks, Jeff.
It looks like I've got quite a bit to cover on my first quarterly call with Callon.
As both Joe and Jeff have discussed, these assets fit exceptionally well with our growing Delaware position and add the opportunity to leverage our development approach across a more robust asset base.
Equally important are the expected enhanced financial outcomes of both the acquisition and the impending equity conversion of the second lien notes.

We have consistently said that any acquisition must advance our strategic priorities.
As we show in the acquisition slide deck, we believe this combination checks all those boxes.
Our ability to deleverage the balance sheet at an accelerated pace through enhanced free cash flow has been one of the core focal points for our team.
Even at our more conservative planning deck, this acquisition should allow us to be meaningfully ahead of our current expectations by year-end 2022.

Operating cash flow, free cash flow, free cash flow per share and free cash flow yield should all improve, inclusive of the effect of the equity issued with the second lien conversion.
This transaction is the type that we believe benefits both our equity and debt investors.
Late in June, we accessed the high-yield capital markets for an oversubscribed, upsized and well-received seven-year $650 million senior unsecured notes issuance.
We used the proceeds from this to fully redeem $543 million of our senior notes maturing in 2023 and reduced borrowings under the RBL.

After that transaction, we received upgrades from both Moody's and S&P based on our improved financial position and visibility to further deleveraging over time.
We now possess the opportunity to advance that deleveraging timetable and, in turn, continue to lower our overall corporate cost of capital.
With this acquisition, we are prudently moving to secure the associated cash flow and protect against any near-term commodity market weakness.
In the past few weeks, we have added hedges for 2022 oil, including 8,000 barrels of costless WTI collar positions at approximately $60 by $70 and supplemented these with 4,500 barrels per day of swaps at approximately $66.50.

With this recent hedging activity, we are approaching historical year-end hedge levels in terms of percentages, which ensures we are on the path to delivering on our promise of an improved balance sheet.
With current strip prices for 2022, hovering around $65 per barrel for WTI, we have made significant progress in securing our conservative planning case price assumptions but maintaining significant upside if the current strip pricing proves accurate.
And finally, speaking to the financing of the Primexx acquisition, we will be paying $440 million in cash.
This is an amount we can place on the credit facility and pay down with free cash flow and divestiture proceeds.

However, we will look to the capital markets to see if there are opportunities to term out a portion of these cash needs, allowing us to continue focusing on increasing liquidity and extending our maturity runway.
At this point, I'd like to turn the call back over to Joe.





Speaker :: Joe Gatto -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Kevin.
I'll wrap up with a couple of quick comments here.
We spent the past several quarters working to reestablish an attractive value proposition for both our equity and debt investors with consistent execution and prudent financial action.
Our second-quarter performance once again delivered on our commitment to capital-efficient operations and an improved free cash flow outlook that is sustainable over time.

With the Primexx acquisition, we will put that model of execution to work on a complementary Delaware asset base that will elevate the value proposition for our shareholders through an expanded inventory for repeatable investment, several opportunities for operational synergy capture and immediate deleveraging that will only accelerate from here with increased free cash flow on an absolute and per-share basis.
With that, operator, I think we are ready to open up for Q&A.





