Speaker :: Katherine H. Antonello -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Thank you, Lori, and thanks to everyone for joining us today.
On today's call, Mike and I will outline our financial results for the second quarter of 2021 and discuss our observations of the current workers' compensation market.
Employers continues to perform well, given the challenges faced by our policyholders throughout the pandemic.
With businesses now reopened and restrictions largely lifted, we are experiencing year-over-year increases in new business submissions, quotes and binds and are encouraged by the rebound we experienced during the second quarter of 2021.

Our second quarter gross written premiums were up 5% year-over-year and we closed the period with yet another record number of policies in force.
More so than ever, we remain confident that rising payrolls and new business opportunities will bring further growth to our top line.
Our year-over-year new business premium for the first half of 2021 is down slightly driven by pandemic-related shutdowns in January and February.
However, our second quarter new business premium was up over 40% relative to 2020 as both the labor force participation rate and unemployment rate continued to improve.
The policy retention rate on our renewal book remains very strong at 94% year-to-date, although this strength was offset to some degree by lower average policy sizes and modest rate decreases.

Overall, our year-over-year renewal premium was down 10% for the first half of 2021 and 8% for the second quarter.
We continue to see declines in frequency for lost time claims and have maintained our current accident year loss and LAE ratio on voluntary business at 63.6%, down from 65.5% a year ago and 64.3% at year-end.

While we experienced favorable loss reserve development of $10 million on accident years 2017 and prior, our second quarter results were tempered by $8 million of adverse loss reserve development associated with two catastrophic non-COVID claims that occurred in late 2020.
Our second quarter expenses decreased by 21% from those of the first quarter of 2021 and are down 17% year-over-year in line with our expectations.
The decrease in our expenses was primarily a result of targeted expense savings, employee departures and lower variable expenses that fluctuate directly with earned premium.

With that, Mike will now provide a further discussion of our financial results and then I will return to provide my closing remarks.
Mike?





Speaker :: Michael S. Paquette -- Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer


Thank you, Kathy.
During the second quarter, we delivered a 3.8% annualized return on adjusted equity and a combined ratio of 98.8% within our largest operating segment Employers.
These modest operating results were largely the result of lower earned premium and net investment income as well as two unusual prior-year large loss adjustments.
For the quarter, our net premiums earned were $137 million, a decrease of 10% year-over-year.
While our written premiums for the first half were down 9%, our second quarter premium writings were up 5%, which demonstrates that our policyholders have endured the pandemic and small businesses are actively shopping for workers' compensation coverage.
Our losses and loss adjustment expenses were $84 million, an increase of 15%.
We recognized $2 million of net favorable prior-year loss reserve development on voluntary business during the current period versus $24 million a year ago.
The increase in losses and loss adjustment expenses was primarily due to the two catastrophic non-COVID claims that we previously mentioned.

Commission expenses were $18 million, a decrease of 6%.
The decrease was primarily due to lower earned premiums.
Underwriting and general administrative expenses were $37 million, a decrease of 17% year-over-year.
Decreases in our fixed expenses, such as compensation and professional fees, resulted from targeted expense savings and employee reductions and departures and decreases in our variable expenses such as premium taxes, assessments, and bad debt expense resulted from decreases in earned premium.
From a reporting segment perspective, our Employers segment had underwriting income of $2 million for the quarter versus $18 million a year ago and its combined ratios were 98.8% and 88% respectively.
Our Cerity segment had an underwriting loss of just over $2 million for the quarter down from an underwriting loss of $4 million a year ago.
We are enthusiastic about Cerity's premium writings, which have consistently increased over the past several months.

Turning to investments.
Our net investment income was $18 million for the quarter, consistent with that of the first quarter, but down 9% year-over-year.
The decrease year-over-year was primarily due to lower interest rates impacting bond yields.
At quarter-end, our fixed maturities had a duration of 3.7 and an average credit quality of A+, and our equity securities and other investments represented 11% of the total investment portfolio.

Our net income this quarter was favorably impacted by $11 million of net after-tax unrealized gains from equity, securities and other investments, which are reflected on our income statement and our stockholders' equity and our book value per share this quarter were each favorably impacted by $10 million of after-tax unrealized gains from fixed maturity securities, which are reflected on our balance sheet.

And finally, during the quarter, we repurchased $10 million of our common stock at an average price of $41.72 per share and on July 21, our Board authorized a new share repurchase authority in the amount of $50 million.

And now, I'll turn the call back to Kathy.





Speaker :: Katherine H. Antonello -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Mike.
Our Cerity operating segment, which offers digital workers' compensation insurance solutions, directly to consumers, continues to gather momentum and now has $1 million of in-force premium, all within our targeted low hazard groups.
A through D. We are encouraged by Cerity's success during the first half of 2021 and continue to believe that its technological and intellectual capabilities will support our future growth initiatives and provide direct access to workers' compensation insurance for businesses seeking an online experience.

For the remainder of the year, we will be focused on improving our economies of scale by capitalizing on emerging labor market improvements while continuing to maintain underwriting discipline and actively managing our expenses.
Our balance sheet and capital position are very strong and are highly supportive of these key initiatives.
As a monoline workers' compensation rider specializing in America's small businesses, we can react to the favorable trends we're seeing appropriately and efficiently and remain confident that we are well-positioned for continued success.

And with that, operator, we will now take questions.





