Speaker :: Russell Lawlar -- Senior Vice President, Chief Financial Officer, and Treasurer


Thank you, operator.
This is Russell Lawlar, Hecla's Treasurer.
[Audio gap] news release that was issued this morning, along with today's presentation, are available on Hecla's website.
On today's call, we have Phil Baker, Hecla's president and CEO; and Lindsay Hall, senior vice president and chief financial officer; Lauren Roberts [Audio gap] chief geologist.

Any forward-looking statements made today by the management team come under the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act [Audio gap] three of our earnings release and our 10-Q and 10-K filings with the SEC.
These and other risks could cause results to differ from what is projected in the forward-looking statements.









Speaker :: Phil Baker -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Russell.
Good morning, everyone, and thanks -- thank you for joining us for our call this morning.
We recognize there's a number of calls today, so our remarks are going to be brief to allow time for questions, and I'm going to speak to Slide 4.
You all recognize the challenges of operating mines in pandemic.

Our fast response, and our industry being considered essential in the U.S., [Audio gap] silver than we guided at the beginning of the year.
So 1.4 million more ounces we produced than what we had guided.
So, in a pandemic, we had our highest revenues, fourth highest free cash flow, and third highest reserves in our history.

silver production.
We are now producing 50% more than we were three years ago.
This growing U.S. silver production allowed us to generate $90 million of free cash flow in 2020.

But over the last 18 months, we've generated $152 million.
We now have $130 million in cash and $380 million in liquidity.
Our silver industry-leading [Audio gap] free cash flow to shareholders this year.
We accomplished this by recording our lowest [Audio gap] 1.22 in our history.

And I think our safety culture is a big reason why we've responded so well to the impacts of the pandemic.
We've continued to help our communities with testing assistance, contributions from our foundation, and I think our [Audio gap] which gives employees vouchers to spend in the local communities.
With all that we've had to deal [Audio gap] year.
And with that, I'm turning the call over to Lindsay to update our financials.

But before I do, with Lindsay's retirement in a month, I [Audio gap] leadership, particularly in 2020.
We had the need to refinance our debt, which he led, and of course, we've had to deal with the pandemic, which he was instrumental in our success.
Lindsay?





Speaker :: Lindsay Hall -- Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer


Thanks, Phil, and good morning, everyone.
[Audio gap] began 2020 with our refinancing of our senior notes and extending the maturity of our long-term debt to 2028 and ended the year with $130 million in cash as we generated robust free cash flows of $90 million, aided by strong margins and higher prices.
Our adjusted EBITDA of $224 million reduced our net leverage ratio to 1.8, beating our target of less than two while providing a liquidity position of $380 million.
Our operations generated $53 million of free cash flow in the fourth quarter with Lucky Friday generating positive cash flow of $1.7 million as the mine achieved full production in the quarter.

Turning to the income statement, you will note the two expense items for the year, loss on derivatives of $22 million and ramp-up costs of $24 million.
Included in that derivative loss is around $15 million for gold and silver puts we acquired to protect against downside price risks.
However, based on the strength of our operations, balance sheet, and liquidity, we do not anticipate the need for such a program in the future.
In addition, in 2021, our cash carry and maintenance costs are expected to be approximately 40% less than the cost incurred in 2020 due to the Lucky Friday mine being in full production.

With lower cash inflows -- excuse me, outflows for care and maintenance expenses and no anticipated outflows for put premium payments and higher silver prices we expense -- expect our '21 free cash flow generation to grow from our 2020 performance.
Before turning it over to Lauren, I would like to thank Phil and the board for giving me the opportunity to be Hecla's CFO over the last five years.
But also I'd like [Audio gap] Mindy Louie has been with me for many years, and lastly very excited that Russell will take [Audio gap].
I'll turn it over to Lauren.





Speaker :: Lauren Roberts -- Vice President and Chief Operating Officer


Thank you, Lindsay.
First and foremost is our focus on safety.
Despite the challenging year marred by the pandemic, our teams continued their exemplary safety performance.
Our all-injury frequency rate in 2020 was 1.22, which is a reduction of [Audio gap] I am very appreciative of the hard work and focus our operation teams deliver on these objectives.

At the Greens Creek mine, we produced 2.3 million ounces of silver and slightly less than 11,000 ounces of gold at an all-in sustaining cost of $12.05 per ounce for the quarter.
Fourth quarter was impacted by a significant weather event in December, when Southeast Alaska was battered by high winds and heavy rains that caused significant damage in the surrounding area and communities.
The rapid response of our team at Greens Creek to minimize the effects of this significant weather event is a testament to their professionalism and resiliency.
2020 silver production at Greens Creek was 10.5 million ounces at an all-in sustaining costs of $8.57 per ounce.

The increase in silver production over 2019 was primarily due to higher grades, and we expect 2021 production and cost guidance to be similar to 2020.
Greens Creek's rock-solid performance combined with these high silver prices generates very strong free cash flow.
In the third quarter, we partnered with a COVID lab to provide real-time testing services for our employees.
This service is helping to shorten the quarantine period and reduces the burden on our employees.

Lucky Friday achieved full production in the fourth quarter and produced 2 million ounces in 2020, more than doubling the prior year's production.
2021 silver production at the mine is expected to be in the range of 3.4 million to 3.8 million ounces.
We anticipate the grades to improve as we mine deeper, increasing the projected production to around 5 million ounces annually over the next three to five years.
No significant planned capital outlay is required to achieve these goals.

In addition, we are pursuing various mining method changes and other initiatives to improve safety while increasing the productivity of the mine.
At Casa Berardi, we had a strong fourth quarter with production of 37,600 ounces of gold at an all-in sustaining cost of $1,330 per ounce.
For 2020, Casa Berardi produced more than 121,000 ounces, in line with our COVID-adjusted guidance at an all-in sustaining cost of $1,436 per ounce.
Our investments in the mill to improve reliability and recovery are yielding great results as the mill broke monthly throughput records with greater than 90% availability for three consecutive months late in the year.

Our ongoing focus to improve productivity and reduce cost is underpinned by multiple factors and some of those are highlighted on Slide 12.
We realized a 10% increase in the underground active time reduced the equipment maintenance backlog by two and a half weeks and launch training for underground operators to increase equipment reliability.
These and other efforts increased the high-grade underground ore delivered to the mill by more than 20% in Q4.
The team is targeting a 10% reduction in support costs through a combination of restructuring, eliminating non value-adding work and negotiating key vendor contracts, including open-pit contract mining, explosive support services, and similar categories.

These efforts are well advanced, and we are starting to see a downward trend in AISC.
All these factors, together with the others in the pipeline, our position in Casa Berardi to deliver consistent production at lower costs, our 2021 guidance for Casa Berardi exceeds 125,000 ounces at a $1,185 to 1,275 per ounce AISC.
In the middle of 2019, we concluded that our approach to Fire Creek was not going to get the results we wanted odds development to generate free cash flow and to gather the knowledge necessary for the long term.
That decision resulted in $38.6 million of free cash flow, with a bit more to come this year, and a bulk sample of refractory ore.

Mining the bulk sample was completed in the fourth quarter with most of the materials shipped to a third-party processor by mid-February.
The bulk test demonstrated that larger scale, more productive methods could be applied successfully to this material.
Ground conditions were as good or better than expected, and water in the test area was managed effectively.
Refractory ore is being processed, and while the processing is not yet complete, the recovery information to date is following the grade recovery curve established through bench testing.

With the significant increase in metal prices, it is no longer attractive for the processor to displace their own feed.
We've initiated discussions with another processor and hope to send around 10,000 tons of stockpiled refractory ore to them for processing in the first half of 2021.
Fire Creek is expected to be placed on care and maintenance in the second quarter of 2021 once the previously developed oxide resource is depleted.
We remain very excited about our Nevada properties with a quarter of the company's exploration budget being spent on Midas and Hollister's Hatter Graben.

Drilling targets at Fire Creek and Aurora may follow as prospective targets are defined.
With that, I would like to return the call to Phil.





Speaker :: Phil Baker -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Lauren.
So, on Slide 14, it shows our consolidated production guidance for 2021 to 2023.
So this is the first time that we're giving multiple-year guidance.

silver production is expected to reach roughly 15 million ounces by 2023, which is almost double our 2018 U.S. silver production.
The combination of increasing silver production and higher prices should cause silver to be the biggest revenue contributor, maybe as early as this year.
Silver mines have always been our largest cash flow contributor, so that's just going to get bigger.

And with that, I'd like to just remind you that we will have one-on-one calls available tomorrow with Lauren, with Lindsay and Russell, and with me from 11:30 to 1:30, and you just need to click the link on our press release.
And with that, operator, I'd like to open the floor for questions.





