Speaker :: Jamie Buckland -- Vice President of Investor Relations


Thank you, operator, and thanks to everyone for joining us today.
This morning, we issued our third quarter earnings release, and this release and the slide presentation to accompany today's call are available on the Investors page of our website.
Joining me on the call today to go through the materials are Andy Inglis, chairman and CEO; and Neal Shah, CFO.
During today's presentation, we will make forward-looking statements that refer to our plans, estimates, and expectations.

Actual results and outcomes could differ materially due to factors we note in this presentation and in our UK and SEC filings.
Please refer to our annual report, stock exchange announcement, and SEC filings for the details.
These documents are available on our website.
And at this time, I will turn the call over to Andy.









Speaker :: Andy Inglis -- Chairman and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Jamie, and good morning and afternoon to everyone.
Thank you for joining us today for our third quarter results call.
I'll run through the highlights for the quarter before handing over to Neal to take you through the financials.
I'll then provide a few closing thoughts in summary before taking questions at the end.

Starting on Slide 1.
A lot has been achieved at Kosmos since our last quarterly call in August.
We've delivered several transactions that have advanced the company's strategy and significantly improved our financial position.
We'll talk more about the Oxy Ghana acquisition shortly.

But in summary, the acquisition is expected to materially increase our free cash flow from high-margin oil assets which we plan to invest in our portfolio transition to LNG at a time of rising global natural gas demand while reducing debt.
The transaction is strategically consistent and financially compelling for Kosmos and is highly accretive across all financial metrics.
In Mauritania and Senegal, we closed the FPSO transaction in mid-August, which materially reduces our capital expenditure at the first gas.
With increased production, including from the Oxy Ghana transaction and higher oil prices, we now expect to fund our remaining capex to first gas through organic cash flow.

We expect the newly acquired assets and our base business to generate significant free cash flow from 4Q '21 and are currently hedging our growing production at attractive levels.
With EBITDAX growing and excess cash used to reduce absolute debt going forward, we expect to lever the balance sheet rapidly and we are targeting a leverage ratio of less than two times at year end 2022 at $65 Brent.
Using current oil prices, that target would be around one and a half times.
And finally, on this slide, the recent transactions continue to strengthen our ESG agenda with growing investment in Africa across our portfolio aligned with our objective of supporting a just energy transition.

Turning to Slide 2.
The acquisition of additional interest in the Jubilee and TEN fields in Ghana accelerates Kosmos' strategic delivery across three key dimensions.
First, the acquired assets generate significant free cash flow.
At $65 Brent, we expect the assets to generate around $1 billion of incremental free cash flow between now and the end of 2026 over two times our initial investment.

At current prices, that figure could be materially higher.
While we manage our business to perform at much lower oil prices, the recent strength in Brent and WTI does highlight the considerable upside potential if OPEC+ continues to be disciplined on supply management over the coming years.
Second, we expect the assets to materially enhance EBITDAX and cash flow, enabling us to grow the company organically while reducing our absolute debt.
With rising EBITDAX and excess cash to further pay down debt, we expect the transaction to accelerate the pace of deleverage to our target level of one to one and a half times.

Third, we plan to use some of our increase cash flow to fund our growing gas activities in Mauritania and Senegal, including our remaining capex to first gas on Tortue phase one.
On the right-hand side of the slide, you will see how the portfolio mix is expected to change as our LNG activities in Mauritania and Senegal ramp up.
We plan to use low cost, lower carbon oil production to finance the transition to low-cost, lower-carbon natural gas, thereby shifting the balance of our portfolio over time and increasing our exposure to the fuel with the strongest long-term demand and a necessary part of the energy transition.
In our 1Q results earlier this year, we detailed the five-year goal to get production up to around 100,000 barrels a day of oil equivalent by 2026 when phases one and two of Tortue are expected online.

Clearly, this transaction accelerates our production goal by several years, while at the same time, strengthening the balance sheet.
Turning now to Slide 3.
We announced the Oxy Ghana transaction on the 13th of October with our intention to fund the transaction through a mix of new equity and new senior notes.
With the greenshoe, we issued around 43 million shares in total, raising approximately $140 million of equity in total.

The shares were issued at a small premium to the previous night's closing price with the transaction multiple times oversubscribed with strong demand from new and existing investors in Europe and the US.
We launched the senior notes offering the following week, issuing $400 million of 5.5 year notes, non-call two, which were priced at 7.75%.
The issue was also heavily oversubscribed with strong demand from both high-yield and emerging market investors.
I'd like to thank our equity and bond investors for their support for both the deal itself and the subsequent financings, which have put the company and the balance sheet in great shape to execute our strategy.

It's very much appreciated.
At the bottom of the slide, you can see the impact of the transaction on our near-term metrics.
Pro forma for the assets acquired, we expect our year-end exit productions to be greater than 75,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day with pro forma EBITDAX of over $900 million for 2021, resulting in year-end pro forma leverage of around two and a half times.
Turning to Slide 4.

Operationally, we continue to make good progress in each of our production hubs.
In Ghana, Jubilee is currently producing above 80,000 barrels of oil per day gross with a J-56 producer coming online in July and the J-55 water injector online in September.
The second Jubilee produce is currently being drilled and is expected to be online before year-end.
This should result in Jubilee production exiting the year above 85,000 barrels per day.

At TEN, gross production is currently around 30,000 barrels of oil per day.
The gas injector came online last month and is expected to support current production levels.
In Equatorial Guinea, gross production is currently around 30,000 barrels of oil per day.
The partnership finished at Ceiba reliability projects in the third quarter with completion of the Okume upgrade project expected this quarter.

The first of three-planned infill wells in the Ceiba complex was completed in August with hookup currently in progress.
In the third quarter, the operator began drilling the second well, which is expected to be online in December.
The third plan well is now expected to be deferred as the rig is being utilized to plug and abandon existing well in Equatorial Guinea is required to mobilize for its next contract before it can complete the drilling of the last well.
We do expect the output from the first two wells will largely compensate for any deferral of the third well, given reservoir down to the high end of expectations from the first two wells.

In the Gulf of Mexico, as previously noted, production in the quarter was impacted by Hurricane Ida, which resulted in around 4,000 barrels of oil equivalent being shut in versus our previous guidance.
While none of Kosmos' infrastructure in the Gulf of Mexico was damage in the storm, lengthy shut-ins arose from key pipelines and receiving terminals being offline, leading to basinwide shutdowns in the aftermath of the hurricane.
Production across our GoM assets was restored to pre-Ida levels by the end of September, which should allow for a strong rebound in the fourth quarter.
We are currently in the process of drilling the Winterfell appraisal well with the results expected later this quarter.

Turning to Slide 5, which looks at Tortue our world-class gas development.
As you've heard me say in the past, Tortue is the right project at the right time.
The chart on the left is one you've seen before.
It shows that Tortue is the right project because of where it sits on the cost curve.

With phase one gas all sold to BP, the real upside potential is a phase two, where we have a huge amount of optionality because the gas is currently uncontracted.
We believe that Tortue phase two can deliver gas into Japan at a breakeven cost of just over $4 per MMBtu.
So therefore, competes very favorably with other new LNG projects expected to start production in coming years.
The chart on the right shows the project is due to come online at the right time, with global gas demand continuing to grow strongly as the world exits the restrictions of the pandemic.

The chart shows the forward curves for JKM and TTF today versus the forward curves a year ago.
If we ignore the near-term elevated prices and look further out to December 2023, the chart shows a rerating of future price expectations with both JKM and TTF leveling out at around $10 per MMBtu, approximately double the same curve from a year ago.
This is fundamentally about robust long-term demand for gas as it places more carbon-intensive alternatives and acts as a baseload partner to renewables in the energy transition.
As demand grows, long-term gas prices are likely to be supported at a level necessary for the marginal cost of supply to meet that demand.

The recent research note Morgan Stanley predicted that LNG demand is expect to rise twice as fast as supply through 2025 with prices expected to be 60% higher over the next five years versus the last five years on average.
In this environment, the lowest-cost gas projects should come out on top.
With Tortue making good progress and other significant gas discoveries we have in Mauritania and Senegal, we believe Kosmos is well placed to take advantage of the strengthening market dynamics.
We have contracted phase one volumes at a slope of around $0.10 to Brent, which means we'd be selling phase one gas at around $8 per MMBtu at current oil prices.

For phase two, we are yet to sell the gas, which gives us greater flexibility on pricing, whether we choose long-term contracts, different indices, spot sales or a combination.
Turning to Slide 6.
Tortue phase one continues to make good operational and funding progress with the four-key work streams all moving forward.
On the floating LNG vessel, mechanical completion activities have commenced with instrument loop checks.

Control system commissioning is expected to commence in the first quarter of next year.
On the FPSO topside integration and hull and living quarters mechanical repletion activities have commenced, pre-commissioning activities are expected to commence later this quarter.
On the Breakwater, we commenced fabrication of 20 of 21 caissons with 12 now installed.
Jetty piling is expected to commence later this quarter.

And finally, on the Subsea, the Nouakchott and Dakar marine supply bases are being established.
This is expected to enable the offshore installation campaign to commence in the first quarter of next year.
As you can see in the top picture on the slide, the Hub Terminal and Breakwater is now starting to take shape.
The image shows the caissons in position, and you can see the impact on the sea state on the protected side of the Breakwater.

The bottom picture and the cover slide of today's presentation shows the Topsides modules being loaded on to the FPSO, another significant milestone for that key work stream.
With regards to project funding, we've completed the FPSO transaction and now have a clear financing path to first gas on Tortue.
The FPSO transaction materially reduces our outstanding capex on the project with all 2021 cash calls now funded through year end and the remaining benefit expected in 2022.
As mentioned earlier, we now expect to fund our outstanding capex to first gas with free cash flow from our base business, which we are currently hedging at attractive levels.

We're also working on the NOC loan refinancing, targeting completion around year end.
As BP planned on its earnings call last week, the project partners and the governments of Mauritania and Senegal are working hard to advance phase two of the project, and we expect a final investment decision in 2022.
I'll now hand over to Neal to take you through the financials for the quarter.





Speaker :: Neal Shah -- Chief Financial Officer


Thanks, Andy.
Turning to Slide 7.
Production of approximately 49,000 barrels of oil equivalent in the quarter was in line with expectations, taking into account the unplanned downtime in the Gulf of Mexico from Hurricane Ida that Andy talked about, which had an impact of around 4,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day in 3Q.
As guided last quarter, sales volumes for 3Q were expected to be low due to the number of cargo liftings, which resulted in a significant underlift of around 1.5 million barrels at the end of the quarter.

Most sales volumes, coupled with a working capital draw, partly related to the underlift and partly related to cash payments in Mauritania and Senegal, prior to the FPSO transaction closing, led to a cash outflow within the quarter.
The lower realized price in 3Q reflects regular monthly settlement of hedges despite lower sales volumes in the quarter.
With 5.5 cargoes expected in Ghana and EG in the fourth quarter and down production restored to pre-hurricane Ida levels, we expect a significant cash inflow in the fourth quarter as we close out the year with more production selling at significantly higher realized prices.
The rest of the line items were largely in line with prior guidance.

Turning to Slide 8.
You've heard both Andy and myself talking about our commitment to reducing leverage with a target of between one and one and a half times.
The Oxy Ghana transaction helps to accelerate delivery of that goal.
The equity debt mix we put in place to execute the Ghana transaction and then the acquired assets had a leverage multiple of less than two times using a trailing 12-month EBITDAX.

This meant the transaction was deleveraging immediately.
The chart on the top slide shows the pace of expected deleveraging through year end '21 and into '22 as we benefit from growing production and higher oil prices, which we are able to lock in with new hedges.
We have started to hedge the acquired barrels with two-way collars at a floor of $70 per barrel and a ceiling of around $90 per barrel.
This gives us EBITDAX and cash flow visibility, both of which should positively enhance leverage over the coming months.

By the end of next year, we are targeting leverage of around one and a half times at current oil prices, which would be below the level at which we exited 2019 and before any benefit from new production in Tortue in 2023.
With that, I'll let Andy wrap up today's presentation.





Speaker :: Andy Inglis -- Chairman and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Neal.
Turning to Slide 9.
As I said in my opening remarks, it's a transformational time for Kosmos, and I'm proud of what the team has achieved within the last quarter.
As I look back, 2020 was a year of survival for the sector, where Kosmos took the opportunity to reposition its portfolio to be fit for the future.

2021 has been a year of resuming operational activity and strengthening the balance sheet, which has been significantly enhanced by the two major transactions I've talked about in today's presentation.
Looking ahead, 2022 is the year in which Kosmos can really start to thrive.
We have the right portfolio for the future and a clear pathway to unlocking shareholder value.
Looking at some of the important milestones we see through 4Q and into next year.

First, we expect our base business assets and the newly acquired assets from the Oxy Ghana transaction to generate significant free cash flow, which we plan to use to fund the Tortue project and to pay down debt.
As we move through 2022, first gas at Tortue comes into view with the bulk of the capital funded.
We also expect to take FID on phase two during the year.
And our 2021 hedges are now rolling off, and we are able to hedge our growing production base at significantly higher levels, giving us increased visibility to enhance future cash flows.

And finally, building on Neal's comments from the previous slide, we're committed to deleveraging the company with 2022 year-end leverage of around one and half times at current oil prices.
Thank you.
And I'd now like to turn the call over to the operator to open the session for questions.





