Speaker :: Jamie Buckland -- Vice President of Investor Relations


Thank you, Darryl, and thanks to everyone for joining us today.
This morning, we issued our first-quarter earnings release.
This release and the slide presentation to accompany today's call are available on the Investors page of our website.
Joining me on the call today to go through the materials are Andy Inglis, chairman and CEO; and Neal Shah, CFO.

During today's presentation, we will make forward-looking statements that refer to our estimates, plans, and expectations.
Actual results and outcomes could differ materially due to factors we note in this presentation and in our U.K. and SEC filings.
Please refer to our annual report, stock exchange announcement, and SEC filings for more details.



These documents are available on our website.
And at this time, I will turn the call over to Andy.





Speaker :: Andy Inglis -- Chairman and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Jamie, and good morning and afternoon to everyone.
Today, almost to the day, marks the 10-year anniversary of Kosmos's IPO on the New York Stock Exchange.
The official birthday is tomorrow.
So I want to start the call with a look back at how far the company has come over those 10 years and also look forward to where we expect the company to head over the next decade.

I'll then talk about the operational highlights for the quarter, review our upcoming appraisal and infrastructure-led exploration activity before handing over to Neal to discuss the 1Q financials and the balance sheet.
Starting on Slide 2.
In 2011, at the time of the NYSE listing, Kosmos was a successful frontier explorer.
The company's operations were centered around Ghana with production from a single FPSO with Jubilee.

Oil prices averaged $111 per barrel that year, and consensus was there wasn't enough supply to meet growing future oil demand.
Full-year production in 2011 was just 16,000 barrels of oil per day, and Kosmos had net 2P reserves around 70 million barrels, almost all of which was oil.
Over the last 10 years, Kosmos has successfully transformed from a frontier oil explorer to a full-cycle E&P.
We brought online the 10 fields in Ghana, discovered multiple giant gas fields in Mauritania and Senegal, and have since taken FID on Phase 1 of the Tortue LNG project.

We have diversified our production and added ILX opportunities with value-accretive acquisitions in Equatorial Guinea and the U.S. Gulf of Mexico.
And last year, we monetized our longer-dated frontier exploration assets.
Over that time, production also nearly quadrupled, and our reserve base increased around sevenfold to where we are today.

While we've grown the business and adapted the strategy to meet the rapidly evolving world around us, one characteristic that hasn't changed is our commitment to corporate responsibility and our dedication to supporting the economic and social development of our host countries.
Around the time of our listing, Kosmos set out to improve transparency across the oil and gas industry by publishing all of our petroleum contracts online.
To this day, we believe we are still the only U.S. oil and gas company to do this.

To enhance the societies in which we work, we set up the award-winning Kosmos Innovation Center in Ghana, which later expanded into several other countries in West Africa.
The Kosmos Innovation Center invests in promising young entrepreneurs and small businesses to bring lasting benefits to the host countries and contributes to the creation of healthier and more diverse economies.
In recent years, we have increased our commitment to the environment, integrating the impact of climate change into our strategic business decisions, shaping our portfolio to be fit and relevant for the future, and setting a goal of carbon neutrality in our Scope 1 and Scope 2 emissions by 2030 or sooner.
As we look at the company today, Kosmos is an oil-focused full-cycle exploration and production company with production from three separate hubs, a world-scale LNG development, a deep hopper of proven-basin ILX opportunities.

We've created a strong platform, which we believe will allow us to successfully navigate the next 10 years with defined high-quality projects in our current portfolio to further grow and diversify production.
Over the next several years, we believe we have line of sight to grow organic production to around 100,000 barrels of oil equivalent with potential options to supplement that further with compelling value-enhancing inorganic opportunities.
In 2023, we expect first gas from Tortue Phase 1 with the second phase planned to come online in the middle of this decade.
This significant ramp-up in company production is expected to make Mauritania and Senegal a major production hub for Kosmos with the gas weighting of our portfolio increasing considerably.

All credible scenarios by leading analysts from economists to financial advisors to scientists have modeled a pathway to 2050 with a significant proportion of natural gas in the energy supply mix.
It's our view that the world cannot achieve the Paris goals and let millions of people out of poverty in a developing world through a just transition without natural gas playing a major role.
With our growth in natural gas and a firm commitment to emissions reduction, Kosmos is playing its part toward the Paris goals.

This consistent agenda to tackle climate as part of our broader commitment to advancing our ESG responsibilities has been a major part of Kosmos's business over the last 10 years.
With a portfolio of advantaged assets, we expect to remain well-positioned to further drive that agenda over the next 10 years.
Turning to Slide 3.
I spoke at our 4Q results in February about the operational momentum that we expect to see return in 2021.

We've made a strong start to the year, and this slide shows the progress we've made across the portfolio in the first quarter.
On production, we plan to drill nine infill wells in 2021, three times as many as we drilled in 2020.
This activity started in line with our 2021 work plan with infill wells already drilled in Ghana and the Gulf of Mexico, and our second well in Ghana currently drilling.
In Equatorial Guinea, our production enhancement activities for this year have started successfully.

We expect to shortly begin our initial infill drilling campaign at three development wells with the rig scheduled to arrive at the end of this quarter.
On development, Phase 1 of the Tortue LNG project is continuing to advance, with 58% complete at the end of the first quarter.
On the FPSO sale and leaseback, the documentation is being finalized and the government approval process is well under way with the transaction expected to close this quarter as previously guided.
On exploration, we started the year with success at Winterfell in the Gulf of Mexico, and partners have fast-tracked an appraisal program with an appraisal well expected in the third quarter.

We're also planning to drill the Zora ILX well in 3Q, more on this shortly.
On financing, late February, we successfully completed a high-yield bond offering.
And this morning, we announced the completion of our RBL extension in conjunction with our spring redetermination.
These transactions have collectively strengthened the balance sheet, increased liquidity, and pushed out all near-term debt maturities.

Having started the year strongly, we remain on track for the full year to deliver between $100 million and $200 million of free cash flow from the base business at $55 per barrel Brent.
Slide 4 looks at the ramp-up in activity across our three production hubs in more detail.
In Ghana, we continue to work closely with the operator to enhance facility performance and drive higher reliability, and we're making good progress.
FPSO uptime in 1Q was 98% at Jubilee and 99% at TEN carrying on the momentum for the second half of 2020.

Water injection at Jubilee, which is helping provide reservoir support, is now at levels not seen since 2012.
Gas offtake of approximately 110 million standard cubic feet per day from Jubilee and TEN is around double the 2019 level, and there is scope for this to increase further.
Greater gas offtake means less gas being injected into the reservoir.
Combined with improved water injection, this is expected to have a positive impact on the GOR at Jubilee, which should mitigate decline from existing well.

The CALM buoy at Jubilee was commissioned in the first quarter, removing the need for shuttle tankers, which reduces opex and streamlines our operations.
As I mentioned in my opening remarks, we're back to drilling in Ghana and have just finished drilling a producer well at Jubilee.
This is the first well drilled on Jubilee since 2019.
It came in as planned and is the first of four wells planned in Ghana this year.

The rig has now moved to drill a water injection well at Jubilee, after which it's expected to complete both wells increasing Jubilee production by an estimated 15,000 to 20,000 barrels of oil per day gross, which should continue to drive our production higher.
In 3Q, after the initial two wells, the partnership plans to drill and complete a TEN gas injector well before drilling and completing a third Jubilee well in 4Q, which is expected online around year-end.
In Equatorial Guinea, we've been active in 1Q with Okume upgrade project nearing completion, adding additional power, water injection, and gas lift capacity, necessary for further facility debottlenecking and additional ESPs.
In April, we completed the first of three ESPs for 2020, one, an upgraded of the G-19 flowline, which has significantly enhanced production from that well.

We've contracted a rig for our upcoming drilling campaign and is expected to arrive in-country later this quarter.
The three planned wells this year will be the first infill wells drilled in Equatorial Guinea since 2015.
In the U.S., Gulf of Mexico, Kodiak-2 was brought back online late in 1Q after a successful remediation of the subsea infrastructure issue identified in the fourth quarter of 2020.
The Kodiak-3 well came online last month, and we plan to drill the Tornado-5 infill well this quarter with production expected in 3Q.

Kosmos delivered approximately 53,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day for the first quarter, in line with guidance, and our production activities remain on track to the year-end exit rate of 60,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day.
Turning to Slide 5.
The momentum we've seen in 1Q across our production activities is matched in our development project.
Tortue Phase 1 ended the first quarter around 58% complete with strong progress across all of the major workstreams, which can be seen on the images on the slide.

The top image is the FPSO where the hole was launched last month.
The bottom image shows the progress being made on the breakwater, five caissons are complete with work ongoing on the next two.
And in April, the first caisson offloading took place.
The full caisson construction process through to offloading has all gone to plan, and the offloaded caisson is now in wet storage ahead of transit to the final breakwater location later this year.

This is an exciting time for the project as the infrastructure starts to move offshore.
Overall, we're making good progress and Phase 1 is expected to be around 80% complete at year-end.
On the FPSO sale and leaseback, documentation is being finalized and the government approval process is well under way.
Late last month, the energy ministers from both countries held a joint meeting on the project where they endorsed the FPSO financing, continuing the strong and consistent support by both countries for the project.

As a result, we feel good about where we are and, as previously communicated, we remain on track for a 2Q completion.
Turning to Slide 6.
We talked in February about the ILX success we had with Winterfell in the Gulf of Mexico at the beginning of the year.
Winterfell is a miocene subsalt discovery found in a trap type common in the Gulf of Mexico.

The exploration well tested two reservoir sections in a single fault block.
And the seismic response is now being calibrated with the well data.
The Winterfell discovery derisks more than 100 million barrels of gross resource potential across Kosmos's acreage position across multiple fault blocks and reservoir section.
Over the last quarter, the partnership has been working on a fast-tracked appraisal plant expected to begin in 3Q with an appraisal well.

This well is designed to test the fault block to the northwest of the discovery, which is the same seismic signature as Winterfell.
The well is also expected to test a deeper horizon with an exploration tail, which can be seen on the seismic cross-section on the bottom image of this slide.
We believe that with a successful appraisal well, we have discovered more than a sufficient resource potential in the core development area to underpin a development decision.
We anticipate the development will likely be phased with up to three potential drill centers.

This discovery located in an infrastructure-rich part of the Gulf of Mexico provides the potential to develop a highly economic, low-carbon project.
Turning to Slide 7, which looks at Zora, our next potential ILX hub.
Zora is planned to be the first exploration well in another mini basin.
The initial prospect, Zora, is a supra-salt miocene target in the same play as nearby analogue producing fields such as Odd Job, Horn Mountain, and Marmalard.

Kosmos will operate the well with a planned working interest of 37.5%.
We have received all of our permits, and the rig has been contracted with drilling planned in 3Q.
As you can see from the map on the slide, the Zora prospect is near host facilities, which can facilitate a low-cost and lower-carbon development in the events of success.
The image also shows that Zora sits near several other prospects where Kosmos has built a material interest.

We believe that our successful Zora well will lower the risk of these nearby opportunities, thus providing the potential to create a new production hub with around 200 million barrels of gross resource potential in total.
With that, I'll hand over to Neal to take you through the financials on Slide 8.





Speaker :: Neal Shah -- Chief Financial Officer


Thanks, Andy.
Good morning and good afternoon to everyone.
Slide 8 shows the financial results for the quarter, which were in line with our previous guidance.
As previously anticipated, production was down year on year largely due to the lack of drilling activity in response to the pandemic.

Drilling activity is ramping up back quickly in 2021, and we expect to see these declines reverse as new wells come online in Ghana, Equatorial Guinea, and the Gulf of Mexico.
The realized price in 1Q, which had been adjusted for derivatives and cash settlements, is slightly lower than at this time last year, reflecting the hedges we have put in place that capped some of the oil price upside within the quarter.
Importantly, the lower per barrel realization also reflects the lower sales volumes in 1Q, a result of our lifting schedule in Ghana and Equatorial Guinea.
We only lifted 1.5 out of 12.5 cargoes expected in 2021 in the first quarter.

This, combined with our spend in Mauritania and Senegal and working capital movements, resulted in negative free cash flow in the quarter.
As cargo timing evens out over the rest of the year and we lift more volume than entitled, we would expect the opposite effect, improving realizations, as well as free cash flow.
In addition, as we complete the FPSO and NOC financing for Mauritania and Senegal, we expect there will be a net cash inflow in Mauritania and Senegal for the balance of the year.
We worked hard in 2020 to drive down costs to make Kosmos a leaner organization, and this can be seen across the opex, exploration expense, interest, and capex lines on this slide.

We have provided second-quarter guidance in the appendix to the slide pack, and our full-year guidance remains unchanged.
Turning now to Slide 9.
We have taken big steps this year to further strengthen the balance sheet and our liquidity position.
In late February, we successfully completed a $450 million senior notes offering to reduce outstanding balances on the credit facilities and for working capital.

This morning, we announced the extension of our RBL facility along with the spring redetermination.
The facility maturity was pushed out two years with final maturity now in 2027.
And we agreed a borrowing base with the banks of $1.24 billion, with $1 billion currently drawn on the facility.
We have reduced the facility size from $1.25 billion -- to $1.25 billion from $1.5 billion to reduce our liquidity reliance on the RBL facility as planned.

The two charts on the slide show the debt maturity profile at year-end compared to the end of the first quarter, adjusted for the RBL extension and the second-quarter RCF repayment.
As you can see, we have taken important steps to address the maturity schedule early and clear all material near-term debt maturity.
At the end of the first quarter, the company had approximately $0.8 billion of liquidity.
With the maturity schedule largely addressed, we remain focused on reducing the absolute amount of debt and leverage through paydown of debt from free cash flow.

We expect leverage to fall rapidly from 2Q and throughout the year as cargo timings normalize and hedges roll off.
We are forecasting 4.5 cargoes in the second quarter from Ghana and Equatorial Guinea, which is three times higher than the 1.5 cargoes from the two production hubs in the first quarter.
With that, I'll hand back to Andy to wrap up on Slide 10.





Speaker :: Andy Inglis -- Chairman and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Neal.
So to summarize, we've made a strong start to the year, executing our planned activity in the quarter on schedule with momentum building across the portfolio.
Production is expected to increase through the year with nine infill wells across our three production hubs.
Tortue Phase 1 remains on track to be around 80% complete by year-end with the FPSO sale and leaseback expected to close this quarter.

We plan to drill the first Winterfell appraisal well and the Zora ILX well in the third quarter to deliver near-term production growth that is low-cost and lower carbon.
And finally, on finance, having completed the bond and the RBL financing, we will now kick off the workstream to refinance the Mauritania and Senegal NOC loans and expect that to complete in the second half of the year.
With all of that, we're firmly on track to hit our year-end exit production rate target of 60,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day, remain on track to generate $100 million to $200 million of free cash flow from the base business at $55 per barrel Brent.
Thank you, and I'd now like to hand the call over to the operator to open the session for questions.





