Speaker :: Ryan Burke -- Vice President of Investor Relations


Thank you, Erika.
Hello everyone, thank you for joining us for our fourth quarter 2020 earnings call.
I'm here with Joe Russell and Tom Boyle.

Before we begin, we want to remind you that aside from those of historical fact all statements on this call are forward-looking in nature and are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those statements.
These risks and other factors could adversely affect our business and future results are described in yesterday's earnings release and in our reports filed with the SEC.
All forward-looking statements speak only as of today, February 25th, 2021.
We assume no obligation to update or revise any of the statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise.
A reconciliation to GAAP of the non-GAAP measures we provide on this call is included in our earnings release you can find our earnings release, SEC reports, earnings supplement and an audio replay of this conference call on our website publicstorage.com.

With that, I'll turn it over to Joe.





Speaker :: Joseph D. Russell -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Ryan.
Good morning and thank you for joining us.
Before we begin and on behalf of the entire Public Storage team, I hope you and your families are well, as we all navigate through this pandemic.
Looking back at the full range of events in 2020, it was clearly a year of historic extremes.
The year began with the predicted consequences from oversupply in several markets.
In Q2 full focus shifted to managing a myriad of unknown issues tied to the virus.
This included judging impacts on our employees, customers, operations, development approvals, acquisition volume and full company revenue.
With an overarching effort to maintain a safe environment and key properties open.

By Q3, we saw a pronounced customer activity emerge as a result of both traditional and new drivers of demand.
In the fourth quarter and into this year, we have seen sustained demand that has lifted the traditional seasonal slowdown in our business, resulting in historic occupancy and move-in rate growth.
I commend the Public Storage team on the numerous successes we had in 2020 and their ability to be nimble and creative in an environment we have never faced before.

Now I would like to highlight eight specific areas of success, as I reflect on the full-year and on the fourth quarter.
First, the integration of technology unlocked a new contactless leasing channel, which we call e-rental, which now accounts for nearly 50% of our move-ins, approximately 300,000 customers use this new offering in 2020.
Second move-in rates grew by 12% in Q4, compared to negative 14% in Q2.
Third, we reached fourth quarter occupancy of 95%, a record for this time of the year.
Fourth, the robust lease up of our 32 million square foot non-same-store portfolio led to 26% NOI growth for both the quarter and the year.
Fifth, after two full years, our third-party management business has expanded to 120 properties with a growing backlog as we enter 2021.
Sixth, our industry-leading development platform has produced a current pipeline of $560 million as we deliver generation five assets across the United States.
Seventh, the acquisition team sourced nearly $800 million of assets in 2020 with over $500 million in Q4.
And we are entering 2021 with an equally vibrant pipeline of $580 million.
And last, our focus on the continued optimization of our balance sheet with record low issuances of preferred equity and debt.

As we begin 2021, we are well equipped and focused on driving company performance on several fronts.
Our advantages, include a well-prime capital structure; broad and growing benefits of the digitization of our business; record occupancy and of course the most commanding platform and brand in the self-storage industry.
The Public Storage leadership team and I look forward to sharing more of these strategies in our upcoming Investor Day on May 3rd.

Now I'll turn the call over to Tom.





Speaker :: Tom Boyle -- Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer


Thanks, Joe.
Financial performance improved steadily through the second half of 2020 with the return to positive same-store revenue, NOI and full company core FFO growth in the fourth quarter.
Our same-store revenue increased 0.8%, compared to the fourth quarter of 2019, which represents a sequential improvement in growth of 3.5% from the third quarter.

There were two primary factors contributing to that improvement.
First, and foremost move-in rates as Joe highlighted were up double digits, while move-out rates were roughly flat year-over-year, which led to improving in-place rents.
To a lesser extent occupancy also increased with move-in volume down, but move-out volume down lower.

Now onto expenses.
The team did a great job driving same-store cost of operations down in the fourth quarter.
Lower expenses were driven by property payroll, taxes, utilities and marketing.
The net result was a return to positive NOI growth of 1.3% in the fourth quarter.
On the reporting front, we enhanced the presentation of same-store expenses this quarter.
We broke expenses into two categories: first, direct cost of operations and second indirect cost of operations.
This provides enhanced disclosure into property level profitability, which once again demonstrates our industry-leading operating margins.
We also posted our first earning supplement on our website last night, which we hope you found helpful along with our 10-K.

Next, our balance sheet.
It's in great shape with two drivers of cash flow growth.
First, as we have for the last five years, we have the capability to fund acquisitions and development activity with retained cash flow and unsecured debt at historically low financing costs.
And second, we have the opportunity to redeem preferred stock as we move through the year.
As we enter 2021, we've seen continued strength in customer demand with occupancies up 250 basis points and in-place contract rent per occupied square foot turning into positive year-over-year territory in January.
The outlook for revenue growth is good with support from demand and moderating supply.
That said, we do see risk to both move-outs, as well as lingering, state of emergency, pricing restrictions as we move through the year.

We expect continued strong expense control in 2021, we provide line by line commentary in our disclosure.
Property tax, expense growth is expected to pickup with around a 5.5% increase for the year anticipated.
But away from that better performance by utilizing technology to change operating processes and investing in energy efficiency, we anticipate continued savings on property, payroll and utilities and a better marketing expense environment as we're operating with lower vacancies.
In sum and improving revenue outlook and strong expense control, as we start 2021.

With that, I'll turn it back to Ryan.





Speaker :: Ryan Burke -- Vice President of Investor Relations


Thanks, Tom.
We do ask that you initially limit yourself to two questions.
Of course, feel free to jump back in queue for follow-up.
With that Erica, let's please open it up for Q&A.





