Speaker :: Douglas Bruggeman -- Chief Financial Officer


Good morning and thank you for joining REX American Resources fiscal 2021 first quarter conference call.
We'll get to our presentation and comments momentarily as well as your question-and-answer session.
But first, I'll review the Safe Harbor disclosure.
In addition to historical facts or statements of current conditions, today's conference call contains forward-looking statements that involve risk and uncertainties within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
Such forward-looking statements reflect the Company's current expectations and beliefs, but are not guarantees of future performance.
As such, actual results may vary materially from expectations.
The risk and uncertainties associated with the forward-looking statements are described in today's news announcement and in the Company's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission including the Company's report on Form 10-K and 10-Q.
REX American Resources assumes no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements.
I have joining me on the call today Stuart Rose, Executive Chairman of the Board and Zafar Rizvi, Chief Executive Officer.

Before going over the financial performance, I would like to mention an additional disclosure in our press release.
After mailing the proxy material, we noted that a reference to broker non-votes and shareholder abstention counting against the proposal to amend the articles of incorporation so as to allow potential issuance of preferred stock by the Company had been erroneously deleted from the proxy.
Effective this morning a supplement to the proxy material is filed with the SEC.
We included a reference in this morning's press release.
We'll post it on our website and we will do a mailing to all stockholders of record bringing this supplement to shareholders' attention.
We apologize for this error but are taking prompt action to remedy and notify all shareholders.

Sales for the quarter increased substantially by 97% primarily due to higher production levels as we had idled our NuGen plant during the first quarter of last year due to the impact of the pandemic among other factors.
Ethanol sales for the quarter were based upon 70 million gallons this year versus 48.3 million last year.

We also benefited from a significant increase in average selling prices in the ethanol and by-products segment.
Reported gross profit of $19.5 million for the ethanol and by-products segment versus a gross loss of $8.2 million in the prior year.
Gross margin benefited from the increased volume and selling prices, which were offset somewhat by higher corn pricing.

Gross profit also benefited from certain shipping costs being recorded in SG&A this year based upon contract terms and our placement of shipping cost.
Our refined coal segment had a gross loss of $1.7 million for the first quarter of fiscal 2021 versus $1.1 million for the prior year based upon increased volume.
These losses are offset by a tax benefit of $2.2 million and $959,000 for the first quarter of fiscal 2021 and 2020 respectfully recorded from the Section 45 credits and tax benefits from operating losses.

SG&A increased for the first quarter to $10 million from $4.6 million in the prior year with the primary increase reflecting again the increased shipping cost related to certain ethanol contracts.
We had income of $570,000 from our unconsolidated equity investment in this year's first quarter versus a loss of $477,000 in the prior year, reflecting the improved ethanol industry conditions.
Interest and other income decreased to approximately $43,000 from $669,000 in the prior year, primarily reflecting lower interest rates.
We recorded a tax provision of $29,000 for the first quarter of this year versus a benefit of $5.3 million in the prior year.
Fluctuations in rates are largely caused by levels of refined coal production and credits versus income during the period.
All of these factors led to net income attributable to REX shareholders of $7.8 million in this year's first quarter versus a net loss of $7.6 million in the prior year.

I'd now like to turn the call over to Stuart Rose, Executive Chairman of the Board.
Stuart, you there?



Sorry.
Going forward second quarter-to-date continues to be profitable similar to first quarter.
Ethanol prices, RIN prices and -- DDG prices and corn oil prices have been strong.
It's been offset by higher corn prices and natural gas prices.
Zafar Rizvi, our CEO, will discuss this further in the call when he discusses the ethanol segment.

In refined coal area, production this quarter to date is exceeding last year's quarter by a large margin.
This is mostly, I believe, due to reopening causing higher utility use and also higher natural gas prices, which is changing the utility we work with, we think, over to more coal.
This business ends in the middle of November but the credits can be carried forward for 20 years and we believe we will benefit from these credits with higher cash flows for years to come.

Quarter-end REX had approximately consolidated $193 million in cash and no debt.
Uses of cash include looking for opportunities in the ethanol business.
It must be a good plant, good locations and most importantly a good price.
We've explored these and so far we have found nothing -- we explored a few opportunities, but nothing is imminent.
We're looking at other opportunities in alternative energy that would fit our business skills.
So far, again, nothing imminent.

Stock buybacks on dips are authorized -- again we buy stock on dips.
We're also working on a serious carbon capture project which Zafar Rizvi will discuss further in his call.

I'll now turn the call over to Zafar Rizvi.





Speaker :: Zafar Rizvi -- Chief Executive Officer


Thank you, Stuart.
As I mentioned in the previous calls, 2020 started and ended with a challenging environment.
But the operating environment in 2021 is beginning to improve as production continued to increase.
According to report from EIA, the ethanol output last week was 55.7% ahead of the same week last year, but the 2021 production remained 3.64% lower when compared to pre-pandemic similar week in 2019.

The ethanol inventories little changed and remained at its lowest level since 2016 according to the EIA -- last week EIA report.
But today's report -- today's EIA report shows production and stock both dropped and same time gasoline demand is increasing.
This improved condition helped in the first quarter and resulted in a profitable quarter.
We are beginning to see some decline in the crush margin due to a number of factors, including the cash price of corn, China's increase in corn purchases, decline in the price of distiller dried grain but on the other hand, increase in the price of the non-food grade corn oil.
We expect the crush margin will continue to be under pressure in the near future.
However, we expect to see improvements as the consumption of gasoline increase with people more comfortable driving greater distance as COVID-19 vaccination rises.

We are pleased that 10th District -- 10th US Circuit Court of Appeal granted EPA request to cancel three small refineries exemption, but over 70 requests -- waiver requests are still under EPA review from RFS compliance year 2011 to 2020.
We hope EPA follows the law and rejects all the requests.

The May 12 EPA report shows -- the May 12 USDA report shows a disappointing 2021 stock carryout of 1.275 billion bushels for the year.
However, 2022 corn prices are expected to increase to -- '21-'22 corn stocks are expected to increase 1.507 billion bushels and corn production is forecast to rise 6% to approximately 15 billion bushels.
The estimated corn yield for '21-'22 is expected to be 179.5 bushels per acre.
Export are projected 2.45 billion bushels.

There was a decrease in the export of distilled -- DDG grains and ethanol in the first quarter of 2021.
Exports of distilled dried grain totaled approximately 2.6 million tons compared to 2.73 million tons in 2020.
We exported 399.3 million gallons of ethanol compared to 485.4 million gallons in 2020.
We are pleased China started to import ethanol and distiller dried grains.

I would like to share the progress, as Stuart mentioned, about the carbon sequestration large project I discussed in our previous calls.
We are working with the University of Illinois to drill a carbon sequestration test well.
The university has completed its pre-drilling site, geological site assessment.
The first stage of preparing the Class VI permit application has begun using existing information and US EPA has begun -- has been notified.
The 2D seismic lining location has been identified and seismic contract has been selected.
We expect the seismic surveys to begin early to mid-June.
The planning, site selection and design of the well are all in progress.

The university is working on permit requirements for the well.
It will be permitted as a test monitoring well and then we expect it will be converted into a Class VI monitoring well.
A FEED study of the capture of CO2 and the design of the facility is under way.
We expect to start drilling in the well in early September.
It should take approximately six weeks to drill and another several weeks of testing.
It will require extensive modeling and computer stimulation to predict the behavior of the CO2 when it is injected.

These stimulation models will determine how much CO2 can be injected at the location, at what rate and eventually distribution in the subsurface.
As I mentioned in previous call, this project is still at a preliminary stage and we cannot predict yet that we will be successful.
Our target ultimately is to achieve net zero-emission.

In summary, we are very pleased to announce profitable quarter and to-date the second quarter is also expected to be profitable.
We are very appreciative and thankful for the hard work of our colleagues to achieve these results.

I will give back the floor to Stuart Rose for additional comments.
Thanks, Stuart.



Thank you, Zafar.
In conclusion, we've outperformed most ethanol companies in the country this quarter.
All closed plants did badly at the beginning of the pandemic and people seem to think you are all equal.

Now as good plants come on line, the good plants do well, the bad plants might have new ideas, new hopes, new dreams but at the core, they remain bad plants.
And anything that someone else might do, they start off with a high price with the ethanol produced and the ethanol will not carry forward into the type of profits that a good plant can generate.

We're working very hard on a carbon capture project which Zafar just described.
Again, this is a real carbon capture project.
A lot of people are announcing carbon capture projects.
We are the one that's actually working on a hole in the ground, which we think is the key to the carbon capture, not just assembling a bunch of people that will give you their carbon.
It's not hard to find people that want to get rid of carbon, everyone does.
But the key is putting it and doing it right into a hole where it will stay in a hole and that's what we're working on and we believe we're way ahead of just about everyone in the country in that area.

The keys to our business is pretty simple.
We have good locations.
We have very good stake in ICM plants.
And really the biggest key to our success is our people.
We try to get the best people, the people that care the most.
And our CEO, as you just heard, is a detailed man.
He looks after -- Zafar Rizvi looks after every detail in this business and has the interest of the shareholders in mind.
And we think that's a big advantage along with having the best people in the industry or what we feel are the best people in the industry.

I'll now leave it open to questions.





