Speaker :: Marc Holliday -- Chairman & Chief Executive Officer


Appreciate you calling in today.
The entire SLG team is here at 420 Lexington Avenue, where we are doing our final earnings call from our Board room in the landmark Graybar building as our next call will be done from our new offices at One Vanderbilt Avenue.

For almost 22 years, Graybar has been our headquarters and base of operation for all that we've accomplished.
But now, 2021 heralds a change for SL Green as we move across the street into our extraordinary, newly completed building that we will soon call home and we could not be more excited about it.

For us, the move begins a new chapter for the company that coincides with a period of reconstruction in New York City, marked by the rollout of the COVID vaccine, the easing of COVID-related restrictions, the promise of federal stimulus for cities and states, and a gradual return of the workforce to offices and other places of business.
And there are many more reasons for optimism as we begin the return to normalcy this year.

The financial and tech sectors in New York City, which account for over half of the office space demand, are doing extremely well and they added 5,000 office using jobs in December alone.
The city is forecasting a significant amount of new office jobs in 2021, such that we would return to pre-pandemic office employment levels by the fourth quarter of this year, recouping all of the 165,000 office jobs lost at the outset of the pandemic.

The credit markets remain quite strong with commercial mortgage interest rate levels in and around the 2.5% level and new construction activity has substantially declined, which combined with job growth will enable supply to come back into balance with tenant demand.

And on the topic of demand, SL Green had a very productive seven weeks since our Investor Conference on December 7, where we held a live in-person event at One Vanderbilt.
During that seven-week period, we signed 200,000 square feet of Manhattan office leases while adding 240,000 square feet of new pipeline, thus increasing our current pipeline as we sit here today to 700,000 square feet, higher than on December 7.

With the leases we expect to sign over the next 60 days, we anticipate being on schedule for our total projected volume for the year of 1.3 million square feet; one of the 18 or so goals and objectives we laid out for everybody in the investor conference.

Of particular note are the lease transactions we announced yesterday, starting with the Beam Suntory deal for 100,000 square feet at 11 Madison Avenue, filling the space which had been vacant since April of 2019.
Suntory is relocating its headquarters from Chicago to New York City to better align its global brand building efforts with all that New York offers.
The Suntory deal and the 92,000 square foot Freshly deal at 63 Madison Avenue, also recently announced, affirms the development strategy that is the underpinning of our One Madison Avenue development project, which is now fully financed and bound with the GMP construction contract from Tishman Construction.

With building permit now in hand, structural demolition has commenced, and we will be delivering the finished project in 2023.
Leasing velocity at One Vanderbilt has been strong since the third quarter and that velocity is carried into 2021 with the signing of two notable leases.

Our pipeline at One Vanderbilt includes three more leases in negotiation and four term sheets that are in advanced stages of discussion.
So, we are currently 73% leases as we sit now.
And at this pace, we are on a trajectory to meet or exceed our year-end estimate of 85%.

Furthermore, our net effective rents that we're achieving on these deals during the pandemic for all signed and pending leases remain within our underwriting assumptions.
There is no other building in Manhattan enjoying this kind of success and it's very, very gratifying to see businesses respond in such a positive way to what we've constructed.

In keeping with our custom for abbreviated opening remarks on the January earnings call that follows the deep dive we take in our December investor meetings, we will open up the line now for questions.
Thanks.





