Speaker :: Rob Luther -- Vice President of Corporate Development, Strategy and Investor Relations


Thank you, and good morning, everyone.
Welcome to our discussion on our third quarter 2021 earnings results, which were reported yesterday.
On the call with me today is Steve Donaghy, Chief Executive Officer; and Frank Wilcox, Chief Financial Officer.
Before we begin, please note today's discussion may contain forward-looking statements and non-GAAP financial measures.

Forward-looking statements involve assumptions, risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially from those statements.
For more information, please see the press release and UVE's SEC filings, all of which are available on the Investors section of our website at universalinsuranceholdings.com and on the SEC's website.
A reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures to comparable GAAP measures is included in the quarterly press release.

With that, Steve, I'll turn it over to you.





Speaker :: Stephen Joseph Donaghy -- Chief Executive Officer, Director


Thanks, Rob.
Good morning, everyone.
Our third quarter results, reported yesterday, demonstrate continued execution of our multiyear strategic priorities, including disciplined growth and operational improvements.
Our direct premiums earned growth of 15% in the third quarter was primarily driven by primary rate increases in Florida earning through the book.
We have now filed for more than 34% in primary rate increases in Florida over the past 18 months while simultaneously continuing to shape our underwriting risk with total policies in force relatively flat year-over-year.
Our business expenses were lower from continued expense management controls, including lower agency commissions and employee productivity gains, in addition to lower executive compensation accruals.
These results were highlighted by a 16.4% annualized return on average equity in the quarter.

I'd like to now turn it over to Frank to walk through our financial results.
Frank?





Speaker :: Frank Crawford Wilcox -- Chief Financial Officer, Principal Accounting Officer


Thanks, Steve.
As a reminder, discussions today on adjusted operating income and adjusted EPS are on a non-GAAP basis and exclude effects from unrealized and realized gains and losses on investments and any extraordinary reinstatement premiums and related commissions.
Adjusted operating income also excludes interest expense.
We ended the third quarter with total revenue down 7.8% to $287.3 million, driven primarily by the realized gain on investments of $53.8 million in the third quarter of the prior year versus a $4.3 million realized gain in the current quarter.
Direct premiums earned were up 15% for the quarter, led by primary rate increases in Florida and other states earning through the book as policies renew.
EPS for the quarter was $0.64 on a GAAP basis and $0.63 on a non-GAAP adjusted basis, driven by a combined ratio improvement of 36.1 points for the quarter to 98.6%.

The improvement was driven by a 30.9 point improvement in the net loss and LAE ratio from decreased weather events and lower prior year's reserve development, partially offset by current year strengthening and higher reinsurance costs impact on the ratio.
The expense ratio improved 3.7 points on a direct premiums earned basis due to continued focus on operating efficiencies, as Steve mentioned in his remarks.
On a net basis, the expense ratio improved 5.2 points for the quarter.
On our investment portfolio, we saw our net investment income decrease 38.6% to $2.8 million, and our realized gains decreased 92% to $4.3 million for the quarter.
Both decreases are the result of the sale and subsequent reinvestment at lower yields of a majority of securities in the portfolio that were in an unrealized gain position in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 to recognize the fair value benefits in surplus.

In regards to capital deployment, during the quarter, the company repurchased approximately 101,000 shares at an aggregate cost of $1.4 million.
The company's current share repurchase authorization program has $17.8 million remaining as of September 30, 2021, and runs through November 3, 2022.
On July 19, 2021, the Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $0.16 per share of common stock, which was paid on August 9, 2021, to shareholders of record as of the close of business on August 2, 2021.

As mentioned in our release yesterday, we are maintaining our guidance for 2021.
We still expect a GAAP and non-GAAP adjusted EPS range of between $2.75 and $3 and a return on average equity of between 17% and 19%.
The guidance assumes no extraordinary weather events in 2021 and also assumes a flat equity market for GAAP EPS.
If weather events exceed plan, we expect to see both the benefit from our claims adjusting business and increased loss costs.
With that, I'd like to ask the operator to now open the line for questions.





