Speaker :: Neal H. Goldner -- Investor Relations


Thank you, Rob, and welcome to the Marriott Vacations Worldwide 2021 Second Quarter Earnings Call Conference Call.
I am joined today by Steve Weisz, Chief Executive Officer; and John Geller, President and Chief Financial Officer.
I need to remind everyone that many of our comments today are not historical facts and are considered forward-looking statements under federal securities laws.
These statements are subject to numerous risks and uncertainties as described in our SEC filings, which could cause future results to differ materially from those expressed in or implied by our comments.

Forward-looking statements in the press release that we issued last night and the presentation we added to our website this morning as well as our comments on this call are effective only when made and will not be updated as actual events unfold.
Throughout the call, we will make references to non-GAAP financial information.
You could find a reconciliation of non-GAAP financial measures referred to in our remarks in the schedules attached to our press release as well as the Investor Relations page of our website at ir.
mbwc.com.

With that, it's now my pleasure to turn the call over to CEO, Steve Weisz.





Speaker :: Stephen P. Weisz -- Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Neal.
Good morning, everyone, and thank you for joining our second quarter earnings call.
As a reminder, this is the first quarter with Welk in our results and we couldn't be more excited about the opportunity it provides us as we look to significantly expand our Hyatt Vacation Ownership business.
Today, more than ever, people want a vacation to see new places reunite with family and friends or just to relax and the products we offer, most with extra square footage in a resort setting are resonating with them.
You only need to look at our occupancies during the quarter to see the high demand for our resorts.
And this is translating not only into higher occupancies, but also into new owners with first-time buyer sales growing faster than existing owners this quarter.

With occupancies and contract sales in many of our North America locations, ending the quarter at or above 2019 levels, we've been able to return our focus back to the transformational initiatives that will help drive long-term growth and improve margins, many of which are digitally enabled.
Before I get too deep into those efforts, let me quickly review our second quarter.
Starting with our vacation ownership business, occupancies continued to improve in a number of key markets during the quarter.
As we've discussed in the past, our two largest markets, Hawaii and Orlando, which combined represent more than 40% of our North American keys were slower to recover in the first quarter.
But both of these markets showed substantial improvement this quarter with Hawaii running over 90% occupancy and Orlando running more than 85% with both locations either in line or exceeding June 2019 levels.

Our Florida Beach and U.S. Virgin Island resorts averaged 95% for the quarter, each above 2019.
And our Mountain and Desert resorts were nearly 90% during the quarter, well above 2019 levels.
Even our urban locations saw a substantial improvement as the quarter progressed, with San Diego with Boston exceeding 85% occupancy for the month of June.
With the strong improvement in occupancies, we grew contract sales by 60% on a sequential basis, and we were only 6% below pre-pandemic levels.
First-time buyers represented more than 30% of second quarter contract sales, up more than 500 basis points from the first quarter, which is very encouraging.
As we've illustrated in the past, first-time buyers have historically doubled their revenue contribution within the first five years of their initial purchase.

So it's nice to see the mix continuing to trend back toward pre-pandemic levels.
Now more than ever, the product we sell is resonating with customers.
This was clearly evident in our VPG this quarter, which was more than $1,000 or 30% higher than 2019 with the improvement coming from both first-time buyers and owners.
Results in our exchange and third-party management business were in line with our expectations this quarter.
Members at Interval International declined on a sequential basis primarily due to the nonrenewal of a corporate account we talked about in February.
Interval exchange transactions were down sequentially due to normal seasonality but we're only down 1% compared to the second quarter of 2019, and average revenue per member was up 7% from two years ago.

We're often asked by investors how long we think this resurgence will last.
While it's hard to answer with clarity, timeshare is still an underrepresented part of the broader leisure market and is resonating with travelers now more than ever.
In addition, people have more money in their pockets and they're just beginning to travel again.
At the same time, our core customer arguably was less impacted by the pandemic.
I also believe that our core product offering, which combines the benefits of staying at a fully amenities branded resorts in a highly desirable location with added square footage is resonating with people who may not have stayed at a timeshare in the past.
So while it's hard to know with certainty how much pent-up demand there is.
I do think the current environment has legs, and we are well positioned to take advantage of the opportunities that lie ahead of us.

With the recovery in full swing, we've been able to turn our focus back toward many of the growth initiatives we paused last year.
If you remember our Investor Day back in October 2019, we spent considerable time talking about the substantial opportunity we have to apply cutting-edge digital tools to drive growth and improve margins.
We've recently restarted much of that work, and I'm excited about the opportunity we have in front of us to continue to transform our business.
I'll give you a few quick examples.
Our customers have been moving into a digital world, and they expect us to move with them.
Two years ago, less than half of our points reservations were made online.
However, as we accelerated our digital customer initiatives last year, it helped drive a substantial increase in online points transactions.

Today, 60% of points reservations are being made online, and I expect that to continue to grow in the future.
We will soon be enhancing the capabilities for customers to not only buy their vacation preview packages online but to book them as well.
While we believe some customers will always want to speak with a live agent, this tool offers substantial growth opportunity for our business when we begin to roll it out later this year.
We're leveraging leading-edge tools from companies such as Salesforce and Adobe to automate our digital marketing campaigns to hone our efforts in targeting the right customer at the right time with the right offer.
We recently relaunched our social media efforts on Facebook and Instagram.
Our objective here is to leverage these low-cost targeted channels to build and optimize our preview package pipeline focusing on generating high-quality tours to drive future contract sales.

We continue to expand the use of technology to lower our back-office costs and improve our associates' experience by leveraging artificial intelligence to augment and automate many of our high-volume internal transactional processes.
And we're making good progress on the technology needed to link our Marriott, Westin and Sheraton products into a single points-based offering in early 2022.
Going forward, we will continue to increase our use of these digital tools to strengthen our infrastructure, grow online package sales, enable self-service bookings, make real-time offerings, enhance the overall customer experience and drive back-office efficiencies.
But innovation at MVW isn't limited to our vacation ownership business.
In our exchange and third-party management segment, nearly 60% of Interval's exchange and getaway transactions have been done online this year, and we expect that to continue to grow.

We are implementing Adobe to enhance our cross-channel customer experiences and improve our ability to more effectively market to members based on a more integrated view of their activities.
And as we mentioned last quarter, Interval recently introduced short-stay getaways, which allows members to book their vacation for less than seven days.
This program offers members greater flexibility when running through Interval while allowing us to be more efficient in our rental programs.
While still early days, short-term getaways represented more than 5% of the total second quarter rentals, and we're finding a lot of members using short-term getaways as a way to extend their stay beyond the week, which is a new incremental usage case.
So let's talk about where the second half might look like and when we think we can get back to pre-pandemic levels again.

We continue to be very encouraged with the improvement of our business.
Occupancies were at or above 2019 levels in the second quarter at a number of locations, while roughly 45% of our North American sales centers exceeded their 2019 levels in June.
Reservations in our urban locations are building nicely for the second half of the year though the recovery in our international locations continues to lag the United States.
We sold 60% more tour packages in the second quarter than we did in the first quarter and ended June with more than 200,000 tours in our package pipeline, which is a positive leading indicator for future contract sales.
We currently have 16% more owner and preview reservations on the books for the second half of this year than we did at the same time in 2019, and bookings already for next year are very strong.

Interval is continuing to work to enhance the technology to significantly expand its addressable market beyond timeshare as we move through the balance of this year, and we look forward to sharing more specifics with you.
And we are working diligently to integrate Wealth into our Hyatt Vacation Ownership business.
There is more work to be done, but we have made great strides in setting the groundwork to reflag the resorts, integrate the businesses and establish a revitalized brand throughout our entire Hyatt business.
It becomes more evident each day that the fit between Hyatt and Welk cultures are complementary in every aspect.
The second quarter strength has continued into July with VPG remaining well above 2019, and our research continues to point to a very strong leisure trends in North America.

For example, over 47 million Americans traveled over the July four weekend with Orlando topping the list of destinations.
42% of households say they are better off financially than they were a year ago and 45% feel now is a good time to spend money on leisure travel.
Google search queries for resorts and hotels are higher than they've been in five years.
Three out of four of our owners say they are ready to travel in the next 90 days, while over 90% of interval members surveyed said they plan to travel in the second half of the year.
Consumer confidence hit a record high in the second quarter of 2021, which is very positive for our business and a growing percentage of people returning to work are splitting their time between the office and home, which could have long-term positive implications for our business.
All of this points to continue strong growth and gives us optimism about the balance of the year.

With that, I'll turn the call over to John.





Speaker :: John E. Geller Jr. -- President and Chief Financial Officer


Thanks, Steve, and good morning, everyone.
Today, I'm going to review our second quarter results, the continued strong recovery across our businesses, the strength of our balance sheet and liquidity position and our third quarter expectations.
As Steve mentioned, this is the first time we have Welk in our results, and their performance exceeded our expectations this quarter.
Given the relative size of Welk, we won't be providing pro forma results, but we will talk about certain items where Welk significantly impacted the quarter.
Moving to our second quarter results.
I'm very happy with our performance with most of our business approaching 2019 profit levels.

Looking first at our Vacation Ownership business, we're seeing more people vacationing at our resorts.
As Steve noted, our two largest markets, Orlando and Hawaii finished the quarter at or above 2019 occupancy levels, illustrating the resilience of our leisure-focused business model.
And with the majority of our contract sales coming from people staying at our properties, we drove increased tours and contract sales in the quarter.
We grew contract sales by 60% compared to the first quarter to $362 million, including $31 million from Welk.
We're seeing more new faces at the sales table, which is good for the long-term health of our business, while owner tours also continue to grow nicely.
VPG was well above pre-pandemic levels in the second quarter, illustrating how well our product is resonating with customers, though with the mix of first-time buyers beginning to normalize as well as the addition of Welk, it was down slightly on a sequential basis as we expected.

Development profit was $65 million in the quarter, and margin was 22% despite $13 million of negative reportability, which we don't adjust when reporting results.
Excluding revenue reportability, adjusted development profit more than doubled on a sequential basis to $81 million, and more importantly, margin was 26%, approximately 240 basis points above 2019.
This was despite lower contract sales and highlights the benefits of more efficient marketing and sales spending lower inventory costs and synergy savings.
Our rental business also improved nicely in the quarter.
Revenues increased 43% sequentially with growth coming from both higher transient keys rented and revenue per available key.
As a result, we reported $15 million of rental profit in the quarter.
The stickier revenue businesses within our Vacation Ownership segment also performed well in the quarter.

Resort management profit increased $18 million sequentially, driven primarily by the substantial improvement in our ancillary business, which was nearly back to 2019 levels and the inclusion of Welk this quarter.
And financing profit increased 20% compared to the first quarter, primarily due to the inclusion of Welk.
But more importantly, profit was in line with Q2 2019.
Excluding Welk, our notes receivable balance would have declined during the quarter.
However, that trend stabilized during the quarter with notes receivable increasing during the month of June as originations exceeded repayments for the first time since the pandemic started.
Delinquency rates also continued to decline sequentially during the quarter, with delinquencies for the Marriott Vacation Club at one of the lowest levels we've seen in the past decade.
And Sheraton and Westin are at the lowest levels we've seen since we acquired them back in 2018.
As I mentioned, we're not providing detailed results for the Welk business given its relative size.

However, I did want to highlight that the vacation ownership results I just discussed included $12 million from Welk better than we anticipated.
As a result, total adjusted EBITDA in our Vacation Ownership segment increased sequentially to $182 million, 90% of the EBITDA that we delivered in the second quarter of 2019.
The second quarter benefited from the strong improvement in contract sales, rentals and ancillary activity and the impact of our business transformation and synergy savings.
Turning to our exchange and third-party management segment.
As expected, adjusted EBITDA declined $4 million compared to the first quarter.
While active members declined on a sequential basis, Interval also saw positive trends from its developer partners, which helps drive new members.
In fact, Interval added 20% more new members than it did in Q1, and we continue to work hard to add more resort affiliations to the system.

After adjusting for share-based compensation expense and certain pandemic-related expenses, corporate G&A expense increased $7 million -- $17 million sequentially primarily related to reinstating our variable compensation plans as well as the inclusion of Welk.
In total, adjusted EBITDA more than doubled in the quarter on a sequential basis to $164 million, with margin approaching our second quarter 2019, even with lower revenue, demonstrating the strength of our business model, the recovery and leisure travel and the benefits of our synergy initiatives.
We ended the quarter with incremental run rate synergy savings of approximately $150 million, taking us closer to our goal of at least $200 million, which we expect to achieve by early next year.
Moving to our balance sheet.

In June, we issued $500 million of 4.5% senior notes due 2029 to refinance our 6.5% senior notes due in 2026, extending our maturity profile and saving us $10 million a year.
Pro forma for those transactions, we ended the quarter with $780 million of cash and total liquidity of nearly $1.5 billion including gross notes receivable eligible for securitization of $97 million.
After adjusting for the July debt repayment, we had $4.8 billion of debt outstanding at the end of the quarter comprised of $3 billion of corporate debt and $1.8 billion of nonrecourse debt related to our securitized notes receivable.
With the continued strong recovery in earnings, the higher free cash flow conversion, we're anticipating from our excess inventory as well as the cash on our balance sheet, we've been preparing to return to a balanced capital allocation approach.

We are currently evaluating exiting the covenant waiver under our revolving credit facility early as well as a combination of repaying some of the $1 billion of debt we issued since the pandemic began and returning cash to shareholders.
Looking ahead, while we're not giving guidance, I do want to help you think through the rest -- of what the rest of the year could look like.
Our Vacation Ownership business continues to recover nicely, and we expect that to continue this quarter.
With occupancies in Orlando and most of our U.S. beach and mountain resorts ending the quarter at or above 2019 levels, we expect tours will continue to grow in the second half, while VPGs will continue to normalize but remain well above pre-pandemic levels.
As a result, we expect contract sales to grow to between $380 million and $410 million in the third quarter, up around 9% at the midpoint and roughly in line to slightly above third quarter 2019 contract sales.

Finally, there are some near-term headwinds to consider as you think about the rest of the year and the path back to 2019 adjusted EBITDA.
One is our slower recovery in our Europe and Asia Pacific regions, where we expect contract sales and rental revenue to remain below 2019.
In our North America business, in order to get more of our owners back on vacation, we decided early in the pandemic to allocate more of our rental keys to owners as demand recovered.
As a result, with the strong owner demand we're seeing for the rest of the year, we expect rental profit to remain below 2019.
And in our exchange and third-party management business, we expect greater owner usage to reduce available inventory for exchange, which will impact our revenue and profit in the short term.

As a result, while we do expect adjusted EBITDA to grow sequentially in the third quarter, these factors could keep us from getting all the way back to the $190 million of adjusted EBITDA we generated in Q3 2019.
The good news is we expect these headwinds to continue to abate as we move into 2022.
Finally, while we're not providing free cash flow guidance today, with more than $650 million of excess inventory, I would expect our adjusted EBITDA to adjusted free cash flow conversion to be well above our normal 55% range for a number of years.

With that, we'll be happy to answer your questions.
Rob?





