Speaker :: Kevin Reed -- Director of Investor Relations


Thank you, operator.
Good morning, and thank you for joining Whitestone REIT's fourth quarter and year-end 2020 earnings conference call.
Joining me on today's call are Jim Mastandrea, our Chairman and Chief Executive Officer; and Dave Holeman, our Chief Financial Officer.
Please note some statements made during this call are not historical and may be deemed forward-looking statements.
Actual results may differ materially from those forward-looking statements due to a number of risks, uncertainties and other factors.
Please refer to the company's earnings press release and filings with the SEC, including Whitestone's most recent Form 10-Q and Form 10-K for a detailed discussion of these factors.
Acknowledging the fact that this call may be webcast for a period of time, it is also important to note that this call includes time-sensitive information that may be accurate only as of today's date, February 25, 2021.
The company undertakes no obligation to update this information.
Whitestone's fourth quarter earnings press release and supplemental operating and financial data package have been filed with the SEC and are available on our website, www.
whitestonereit.com, in the Investor Relations section.
During this presentation, we may reference certain non-GAAP financial measures, which we believe allow investors to better understand the financial position and performance of the company.
Included in this earnings press release and supplemental data package are the reconciliations of non-GAAP measures to GAAP financial measures.
With that, let me pass the call to Jim Mastandrea.





Speaker :: Jim Mastandrea -- Chairman and Chief Executive Officer


Thank you, Kevin, and thank you all for joining us on our fourth quarter and year-end 2020 investor call.
We continue to hope that all of you, your families, your businesses remain healthy and are doing well as we continue to navigate these most unusual times.
Let me discuss the many positives that can be derived from the last year of challenges, and how our unique business model that we designed successfully passed a gauntlet of stress tests over this past year.
The proof of Whitestone's concept has become a reality, well before COVID hit.
In the previous investor calls, we've often talked about the necessity of being local, the essential tools of convenience, leasing to well capitalized tenants that have skin in the game and the evolution of retail to smaller, more flexible spaces.
From its inception, Whitestone has differentiated itself from our competitors with our avoidance of big boxes and hard and soft goods selling national retailers and have favored the smaller footprint, service-based entrepreneurial tenants.
Our tenants or triple net in during normal times in the real estate world a disruptive contrarian concept like ours would take years to play out.
What we have witnessed, however, is in the real estate industry 10 years of this Freshman was condensed into 10 months.
The result, we make this statement given the results of our team has had been able to achieve and facing such difficult headwinds this past year.
I would like to highlight six key factors in achieving our results.

First, we had strong cash rental collections.
Over the past year Whitestone has consistently been near or at the top of the shopping centre industry regarding quarterly cash rental collections.
In the second quarter, we collected 81% versus an industry average of 73%.
In the third quarter, we collected 90% versus the industry average of 88%.
And in the fourth quarter, we collected 95% versus the industry average of 93%.
We are pleased to see the continued upward trend and are happy to announce 96% collections for the month of January.
And second, solid tenant leasing, our leasing team was extremely productive.
And our leasing spreads were quite strong, as we ended the year with blended leasing spreads of 8.9% for new and renew leases.
This productivity underscores the quality and desirability of our properties and the well coordinated work of our leasing team.
Waiting time of distress and uncertainty, tenants exhibited a flight to quality and signed leases where they knew their businesses would thrive.
Third, we have steady occupancies.
And it is a testament to the quality of the tenant mix we strategically crafted.
And higher occupancy has held consistent over the past three quarters.
We have maintained levels between 88% and 90% and ended the fourth quarter with an occupancy level at 8.2%, roughly just 2% below Whitestone's 2019 year-end occupancy.

We consider the upside of bringing our occupancy into the 90% to 95% range, very doable.
And we will report our progress during 2021.
With minimal tenant bankruptcies, another example of the sustainability of our tenant mix is we have less than 0.5% of our Annualized Space Rents, ABR are only six out of almost 1,400 tenants that are in bankruptcy.
Our diversified entrepreneurial tenant base brings stability to our cash flows, without these interruptions.
Fifth, our foot traffic, one of the most encouraging signs from these actions and a good harbinger of things to come is a significant foot traffic we're seeing at the properties.
A December article by S&P Global highlighted, Whitestone's number one ranking, for the shopping centre industry in foot traffic recovery on Black Friday with an 81% year-over-year recovery.
This far outpaced the industry average of only 48%.
It also supported and confirm, our internal research using third-party artificial intelligence software that showed over 80% year-over-year recovery at the properties for the entire month of November.
And six, we had uninterrupted monthly dividends.
As one of the few monthly dividend paying public reads, we're very conscientious of the importance of the monthly dividend to our shareholders, albeit at a reduced rate during COVID.

We continued with a monthly dividend for many other suspended distributions.
With the strength, stability and predictability of our cash flows, we continue uninterrupted payouts for now going on 126 consecutive months.
As we navigate this pandemic, I have often said, we are not looking to win the pandemic.
But we are looking to win the recovery.
These results are putting us in a great position to do so.
Highlighting the success of these six factors gave us the ability to do three things.
First, we increase the dividend, most recently our Board decided to raise the dividend by 2.4%.
This increase underscores the team's confidence in the consistency of our operations and the ability to enter 2021 with a winning recovery and profitably go with our base of high quality properties in the future.
Second, we repaid the $30 million of COVID borrowings.
Again, I reiterate that the strength of our operations have mitigated the need for our precautionary $30 million drawdown of our credit facility availability during COVID.
By year end, we had repaid the entire $30 million of borrowings and strengthened our balance sheet.
And third, we've published our inaugural corporate responsibility report.

With a look to the future in our continued enhancement, our ESG efforts, we published our inaugural corporate responsibilities and sustainability report in December.
We view ESG as an integral element to Whitestone as we continue forward.
Taking a step back at all these results in aggregate, one will realize it is a true testament, uniqueness of our business model, our forward thinking management team, our high quality properties, and high growth markets we specifically chose to be in.
The nature of our business model begins with owning properties located in areas with high household income neighbourhoods in fastest growing MSAs, in business friendly states.
One of the key differentiators that separates Whitestone is we own the properties in places where people want to live.
COVID has accelerated the pace of migration already in motion out of the regulatory and tax burden some states and into the business friendly states of Texas and Arizona, where we presently concentrate our work.
Another key differentiator and further proof of Whitestone small footprint concept is that we own the right side retail.
A recent article published by Forbes in September discusses the acceleration of national retailers like Target, Kohl's, and Macy's transformation is to get stronger.
The obsolescence of a larger, big box retailers and malls continue to move ahead as we continue to benefit from this shift of traditional mall tenants, other malls in an open air shopping centers.

The essential convenience of our community centre properties was never more evident than it has been during the pandemic.
99% of our businesses are open as of year end.
The press upon this important fact even further year-over-year, foot traffic continues to increase at some of our properties.
We eagerly anticipate getting back to our growth value add strategy that includes our $250 million of internal intrinsic value opportunities, and $500 billion of an external acquisition pipeline prospects, with a proven model, stronger platform with greater financial flexibility, and a leaner, more cohesive team to scale our business.
The performance of our team and the execution of our business model is deeply rooted in Whitestone's culture.
Throughout this past year, I have been often reminded of a classic book titled The little Engine That Could.
This inspiring story illustrates the human determination displayed at Whitestone.
Despite our current size, we continue to deliver large returns with a purpose and a mission to serve our shareholders regardless of the challenges we may face ahead.
I am very pleased with the dedication of our management team and what they displayed in navigating this crisis.
I am proud of how Whitestone's operations team stepped up, met the daunting challenges head on ignore the nosayers and overwhelmingly exceeded expectations.
Given these results and staying true to our values, I remain very optimistic for the future and the potential to create increased value for our shareholders.
With that background, I would be pleased to turn the call over to Dave Holeman, our Chief Financial Officer.
Dave?





Speaker :: Dave Holeman -- Chief Financial Officer


Thanks, Jim.
First, I would like to echo Jim's comments regarding the strength, the economic recovery in our markets and properties.
Our foot traffic recovered strongly, and our cash collections continue to build toward pre-COVID normal levels.
Our occupancy has been impacted, but only by about 2%.
Our leasing activity has rebounded to pre-COVID levels and leasing spreads have remained strong throughout 2020.
We have a highly dedicated team that works every day to create local connections and communities that thrive.
We continue to see the strength of our geographic focus and our forward thinking well crafted tenant mix.
Despite having a significant amount of our tenant businesses impacted, we only had a handful of tenants close for good, such that the portfolio occupancy rate held up well, ending the year at 88.2%, down 2.1% from last year, or approximately 100,000 less least square feet, representing the net loss of only nine tenants year over year.
Also, our annualized base rent per square foot at the end of the quarter was $19.43 and $19.58 on a cash and straight line basis.
This represents a 1% decrease on both a cash and straight line basis from a year ago.
The change on a straight line basis is largely related to the conversion of 102 tenants to cash basis accounting and the associated write-off of accrued straight line rents.

During 2020, the impact to funds from operations from these cash basis conversions was approximately $3.5 million $0.08 per share.
At year end, we have 54 tenants on a cash basis, representing 4.2% of our gross leasable area and 4.6% of our annualized base rent.
Cash basis tenants paid 65% of contractual rents in the fourth quarter, up from 63% in Q3 and 41% in Q2.
Our square foot leasing activity was 10% higher than the fourth quarter of 2019 and our blended leasing spreads on new and renewal leases on a GAAP basis was a positive 8.9% for the year.
As Jim mentioned, for the quarter, we collected 95% of our rents.
This includes base rent and triple net charges billed monthly.
Our deferred rents for the quarter were 2.6% of our total contractual billings.
While we are encouraged by how things are progressing, the pandemic has had an impact on our full year 2020 financial results.
Funds from operations core was $0.24 per share for the fourth quarter and $0.93 per share for the full year.
Same-store net operating income was 4.2% lower for the quarter and 4.4% lower for the full year.
The impact on FFO core for the quarter and year from incremental COVID reserves was approximately $0.02 and $0.13 respectively.
Let me provide some further details on our collections and related receivable balances.
Included in our supplemental data package is a breakdown of our tenants by type.
All of our tenant categories were above 90% collections in Q4, with the exception of fitness, representing 4% of our revenue at 82% and entertainment, representing only 2% of our revenue at 48%.
Our largest tenant categories, restaurants, grocery, and financial services were at 96%, 99%, and 99%, respectively.

At year end, we had $23 million in accrued rents and accounts receivable, broken down the components of the $23 million consists of $16.3 million of accrued straight line rents and other receivables, $20.7 million of billed receivables, $2.2 million of deferred receivables, offset by a bad debt reserve of $16.4 million.
Since the beginning of the year, our billed receivable balance has increased $4 million and our deferred receivables have increased $2.2 million for a total billed and deferred receivable balance increase of $6.2 million.
Against this increase, we have recorded and uncollectible reserve in 2020 of $5.6 million or 90%.
Turning to our balance sheet.
Since March, we have implemented various measures to strengthen our liquidity and navigate the economic pressures caused by the pandemic.
Our liquidity representing cash and availability on our corporate credit facility stands at $44 million at year end, down only 6% from $47 million at year end 2019.
During the fourth quarter, we paid off all COVID-19 liquidity borrowings, and our total net real estate debt is down $12 million from a year ago.
Currently, we have $131 million of undrawn capacity, and $18 million of borrowing availability under our credit facility.
We are in full compliance with our debt covenants, and expect to remain so in the future.

2020 has been an unprecedented year, in which our team has worked together through this ongoing crisis, and our shareholders will reap significant future benefits through greater collaboration, a more robust exchange of ideas, better and more effective communication, and improve systems and processes that provide Whitestone new actionable data and allow us to more efficiently scale our infrastructure.
Whitestone operates in many of the most highly desirable growth markets in high population growth states and we expect these markets to continue to lead the country and economic recovery from the pandemic.
And lastly, regarding guidance, it is our intention to resume providing guidance later in 2021 as the pandemic and macro economic uncertainty continues to dissipate.
And with that, we will now take questions.





