Our first quarter pro forma adjusted EBITDA grew 10% versus last year due to our integration savings, the impact of the Norman Hay acquisition last quarter, and the additional cost control measures we put in place to combat the global effect of COVID-19 on our volumes.
This analysis continues to show that we took share in the marketplace as we estimate total organic volume growth due to net share gains was approximately 2% in the first quarter of this year versus the first quarter of last year.
Overall, our higher expected synergies, additional cost saving actions, the improvement in our gross margins, and the expected release in cash via working capital reductions are expected to continue to help us during this period of time when our volumes are down.
We followed a similar review format for this deck as the one we used for our last couple of calls post Combination, where our comparison periods show actual and non-GAAP results as well as pro forma sales and pro forma adjusted EBITDA as if we've been combined with Houghton throughout the periods presented.
The main non-GAAP adjustments are combination and restructuring charges totaling about $10 million and a $38 million non-cash impairment charge in Q1 to reflect the writedown of our Houghton trademark indefinite-lived intangible assets to their estimated fair value.
And if we look forward to 2021 and 2022, I continue to be optimistic in our future, and I do expect us to achieve significant increases in our adjusted EBITDA, as we complete our integration cost synergies, continue to take share in the marketplace, and benefit from a projected gradual rebound in demand in our end markets over this period of time.
Concerning gross margins, you may recall from our comments in the past that the combined gross margins of Quaker Houghton were expected to be about 1% lower than stand-alone Quaker.
Despite the challenges we faced in Q1, the Company generated good cash flow and adjusted EBITDA, which was up 10% on a pro forma basis and non-GAAP earnings per share of $1.38 was well above consensus of $1.
I am very proud of what the Quaker Houghton team has done to continuing servicing our customers as well as continuing with our integration, which has not missed a beat.
For us, our top priority is to protect the health and safety of our employees and our customers, while ensuring our business continuity to meet our customers' needs.
For 2020, our new estimate is $53 million of cost synergies achieved versus our previous estimate of $35 million.