Due to the strength of our advisory revenues compared to the declines experienced by our larger competitors, we expect to increase again our market share of advisory fees among all publicly reporting firms on a trailing 12-month basis, the 8.6% from 7.9% for the 12-month period ending March 31, 2019, and from 8.3% at the end of 2019.
These businesses are smaller than our M&A advisory business and it will take time before the increase in revenue related to restructuring and debt and equity capital markets advisory activities are recognized.
Our first quarter compensation ratio of 62% was impacted by the revenue decline in other revenue, caused by the shift from gains to losses associated with the investment portfolio that hedges a portion of our deferred cash compensation plan.
If we continue to work collaboratively and adapt to the changing needs of our clients and communities, we will emerge from this period well positioned for future long-term growth and market share gain.
Advisory fees of $359 million, our largest revenue source, increased 10% compared to the first quarter of 2019, and held up very well compared to our larger competitors, almost all of whom experienced double-digit declines between 10% and 20% in their advisory revenues.
Adjusted operating income and adjusted net income of $82.5 million and $57.8 million declined 14% and 29% respectively, and adjusted earnings per share of $1.21 declined 27% versus the first quarter of 2019.
Here again, our change in operating income was affected meaningfully by the changes in the value of the hedges for our deferred compensation plans rather than any change in our compensation philosophy, and the larger change in net income and earnings per share was significantly affected by the higher tax rate in the first quarter of 2020 as compared to 2019.
We remain focused on our capital management strategy, and returned $178.1 million to shareholders during the quarter through dividends and repurchase of 1.8 million shares at an average price of $76.57.
We historically have reflected a compensation ratio in the first quarter based on our best estimates for the full year revenue expectations and compensation requirements and reassess that compensation ratio each quarter to address changes in these expectations.
At this time, it is uncertain how long our business will be negatively affected by COVID-19 and the associated economics and market downturn.