We added more than one million fiber subscribers for the fourth consecutive year, and full year broadband revenues were up 6.5% as we returned our Consumer Wireline business to revenue growth.
We finished last year with strong momentum in growing customer relationships, achieving outstanding yearly subscriber growth across Mobility, fiber, and HBO Max.
This includes simplifying and enhancing our customer experience, which has resulted in higher customer self-service, lower customer churn and greatly improved mobility NPS and industry-leading fiber NPS.
Simultaneously, we took on the task of structuring our communications, video, and media businesses in a manner that ensures their future success with the right capital structures, access to capital, and most importantly, the ability to drive better returns in a manner consistent with their respective market opportunities.
For the quarter, cash from operations was $11.3 billion, spending increase year over year with capex of $3.8 billion and gross capital investments totaling $4.9 billion.
We also continue to generate meaningful levels of free cash flow, nearly $27 billion in 2021, a number we feel good about when looking at our business after the WarnerMedia transaction.
Growth in mobility was more than offset by a decline at WarnerMedia from the increased HBO Max investment, the new DIRECTV advertising channel arrangements, and lower contribution from basic networks.
We also surpassed our high-end guidance for global HBO Max and HBO subscribers, adding 13.1 million subscribers in 2021, more than any year in HBO's history.
We achieved more than half of our $6 billion cost savings run rate target, which we've reinvested into operations supporting our growth.
We also continue to rationalize our low-margin Business Wireline services as we reinvest savings into segments that support improving returns.
We also expect to remain a top dividend-paying company after deal close, with a dividend payout in the $8 billion to $9 billion range where anywhere in that range should rank us among the best dividend yields in corporate America.