During the quarter, organic net sales declined 12% and adjusted EBIT decreased 27% driven by lower sales volume and a lower adjusted gross margin partially offset by lower marketing and selling expenses.
Year-to-date adjusted EBIT of $1.14 billion was comparable to prior year as a lower adjusted gross margin and increased adjusted administrative expenses were offset by lower adjusted marketing and selling expenses, higher adjusted other income and sales volume gains.
On a two-year basis, we had net sales momentum in key categories with share gains over prior year in condensed soups, ready-to-serve soups, Swanson broth, Prego, and Pacific Foods.
Our sales results benefited from the continued momentum of our Snacks power brands and our U.S. retail products in our Meals & Beverage division as well as the early signs of recovery from our foodservice business.
Turning to Slide 12, as Mark just shared, our third quarter results were impacted by last year's demand surge related to the start of the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the gross margin impact due to pronounced inflation, our transition out of the COVID-19 environment, and some executional pressure as we continued to advance our transformation agenda primarily in our Snacks division.
This includes areas like lower fixed cost leverage as we lap the year ago elevated levels of demand, sustain labor challenges and added investment in higher cost co-manufacturers to recover fully on supply.
Compared to the third quarter of fiscal 2019, we delivered strong consumption growth of 9% against organic net sales growth of 3% with the gap driven by our foodservice business, which continued to recover as governments gradually eased on-site dining restrictions in some markets.
These results were driven by our decision to invest in supply and service while preserving brand investments with advertising and consumer promotion expense as a percentage of net sales comparable to last year.
Pacific Foods continued to be a powerful growth engine within our soup portfolio with in-market consumption growth of nearly 30% on a two-year basis and continued share gains versus prior year, marking its sixth consecutive quarter of share improvement.
These transitional costs reflect about half of our gross margin erosion in the quarter and while we expect the impact of these costs to moderate into the fourth quarter, they will continue to add pressure as we fully cycle the COVID-19 environment.