Profitability was strong, with operating margin increasing to approximately 25%, as a result of solid Business Solutions revenue growth and lower planned marketing investments, which was partially offset as we continued to invest in our technology and global omnichannel platform.
Our business continues to rebound from the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic delivering double-digit revenue growth in digital and Business Solutions as well as strong profitability and operating cash flow during the quarter.
Although wu.com growth is moderating as expected, as we grow from a much larger base and compare results against the prior year's accelerated growth levels, we anticipate growth to remain healthy as we continue to invest in marketing, product and customer experience.
The consolidated GAAP operating margin in the quarter was 24.8% compared to 22.7% in the prior year period, while the consolidated adjusted operating margin was 25.2% in the quarter compared to 23.5% in the prior year period.
Overall, we achieved revenue growth in the quarter of 2% on a reported and constant currency basis, which was driven by 15% growth in digital and 31% growth in Business Solutions.
Year-to-date, our cross-border principal increased 19%, reflecting the elevated levels of support that our customers provide to their loved ones during the period of uneven economic recovery.
B2C transactions declined 1% for the quarter as the slow recovery from COVID-19 impacted retail money transfer, partially offset by 19% transaction growth in digital money transfer.
Our progress confirms that the capabilities we have built to serve our branded direct digital business is also well suited to serve the needs of leading banks and digital wallet providers.
We are able to offer a branded solution partners who want to feature our leading brand in cross-border payments or we can offer capabilities that partners incorporate as a white label solution.
The GAAP and adjusted margin increases were primarily driven by revenue growth and lower planned marketing investment, partially offset by higher technology investment.