Speaker :: Sean Gillen -- Vice President & Chief Financial Officer


Thanks, John.
Our sales in the quarter of $436.6 million were up 8.2% or $33 million year-over-year.
Sales in our Aviation Services segment were up 8.9%, driven by a recovery in our commercial markets.
And sales in our Expeditionary Services segment were down $1.3 million.
Our commercial sales were up 33%, while our government sales were down 15%.
The decline in government sales was driven primarily by the level of activity on our program for the modification and sale of two C-40 aircraft to the U.S. Marine Corps in the year ago quarter.
Sequentially, our commercial sales declined 3.6%, due primarily to the impact of the Delta variant on our parts supply activities, and our government sales declined 4.7%, driven by the wind down of certain programs and the reduction of activity in Afghanistan.

Gross profit margin in the quarter was 18% versus 17.2% in the prior year quarter, and adjusted gross profit margin was 16.7% versus 13.9% in the prior year quarter.
This significant margin expansion was driven by the efficiency improvement and portfolio refinement actions that we have taken and also reflects the benefit of closing out certain contracts in our commercial and government businesses.
Gross profit margin in our commercial businesses was 17.3% and gross profit margin in our government businesses was 18.9%.
The adjustments in the quarter apply to both the commercial and government end markets, but were more heavily weighted toward commercial.

SG&A expenses in the quarter were $47.1 million or 10.8% of sales.
Excluding adjustments of $1.1 million related to severance and investigation and remediation costs, this would have been closer to 10.6% of sales, in line with Q1, despite the decline in sales.
SG&A is still approximately $10 million below the pre-COVID amount from Q2 of FY '20.
Going forward, we do not expect SG&A to grow in proportion to revenue.
As a result, as the commercial demand environment recovers and we continue to win additional government business, we expect to be able to drive SG&A to 10% of sales or lower.

Net interest expense for the quarter was $0.4 million compared to $1.3 million last year, driven by lower borrowings.
Average diluted share count for the quarter was 35.6 million versus 35 million for the prior year quarter.
As John indicated, we generated cash flow from our operating activities from continuing operations of $15.9 million and also reduced our accounts receivable financing program by $10 million in the quarter.
During the quarter we repaid our Canadian term loan of $24.7 million using our revolving credit facility, which further simplifies our debt capital structure.

Our balance sheet remains exceptionally strong with net debt of $61.8 million and net leverage of 0.4 times.
Regarding the share repurchase program, as indicated in our release earlier this afternoon, it's a $150 million authorization to acquire shares at management's discretion during open trading windows, and we intend to fully deploy the authorized amount over approximately in the next two years.

Thank you for your attention, and I will now turn the call back over to John.





Speaker :: John M. Holmes -- President & Chief Executive Officer


Great.
Thank you, Sean.
Turning to the quarter ahead, as of now, the Omicron variant has not impacted our customers' maintenance plan.
As such, we expect MRO activities to remain at the current levels, which are near full capacity.
Parts supply, which is our most international activity, is more likely to be impacted by the reinstatement of global travel restrictions, which could further extend the timeline for full recovery.
That said, we expect the impact of each new variant to diminish as we move forward although -- and although the timing is difficult to predict, parts demand we expect will eventually return as operators move to restock their inventory.
Further, we expect to grow our business beyond just the scope of the recovery, given the incremental interest in USM and as we continue to secure new long-term exclusive distribution agreements.

On the government side, the F-16 program demonstrates that our commercial best practices are resonating with the government customer and our pipeline is full, and we expect to be able to continue to expand our government programs portfolio.
Notwithstanding the uncertainty, we feel good about our backlog and parts supply, the loading in our hangars and our government pipeline.
As such, we expect to see sequential growth in Q3 with sales approaching the levels we saw in Q1.
We are now entering our eight quarter in a COVID world.
We are very pleased with the performance that we've been able to deliver over that time, particularly our margin improvement and our ability to strengthen our balance sheet through consistent cash flow generation.
Our launch of $150 million share repurchase program reflects our progress and our confidence, and you can expect continued execution from us over the coming quarters and years.

And with that, I'll turn it over to the operator for questions.





