Speaker :: Brendan E. Krueger -- Chief Finance Officer, Vice President of Finance & Treasurer


Thank you, operator.
Thank you for joining us for Antero Midstream's Third Quarter 2021 Investor Conference Call.
We'll spend a few minutes going through the financial and operating highlights, and then we'll open it up for Q&A.
I would also like to direct you to the home page of our website at www.
anteromidstream.com, where we have provided a separate earnings call presentation that will be reviewed during today's call.
Before we start our comments, I would first like to remind you that during this call, Antero management will make forward-looking statements.

Such statements are based on our current judgments regarding factors that will impact the future performance of Antero Resources and Antero midstream and are subject to a number of risks and uncertainties, many of which are beyond Antero's control.
Actual outcomes and results could materially differ from what is expressed, implied or forecast in such statements.
Today's call may also contain certain non-GAAP financial measures.
Please refer to our earnings press release for important disclosures regarding such measures, including reconciliations to the most comparable GAAP financial measures.
Joining me on the call today are Paul Rady, Chairman and CEO of Antero Resources and Antero Midstream; and Michael Kennedy, CFO of Antero Resources and Director at Antero Midstream.
With that, I'll turn the call over to Paul.





Speaker :: Paul M. Rady -- President, Chairman & Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Brendan.
I'll start on slide number three, entitled Expansion Projects Supporting the Drilling Partnership, which illustrates the progress on our midstream build-out supporting the AR and QL Partners drilling partnership.
First, as shown on the bottom left portion of the page, we placed the Smithburg one processing plant online in early July, adding 200 million cubic feet a day of incremental joint venture processing capacity.
This brings the joint venture's total processing capacity to 1.6 Bcf per day.
Consistent with our just-in-time capital investment philosophy, the joint venture processing capacity was 96% utilized during the third quarter.
As you can see on the right-hand side of the page, we continue to build out our compression infrastructure in Tyler and Wetzel Counties in West Virginia.

These stations, which will be placed online in early 2022, will support the incremental throughput growth from the drilling partnership over the next several years.
Looking ahead to 2022, we will continue the Marcellus midstream build-out, constructing a high-pressure pipeline from Tyler and Wetzel Counties down to the Sherwood and Smithburg processing complex.
In addition, we will continue building out our low-pressure gathering infrastructure in this area, where AR's development is focused over the next several years.
Importantly, we are encouraged by the well performance in the core Marcellus, where our build-out is focused, which drive stronger economics for Antero Midstream.
slide number four, entitled AR's peer-leading premium core drilling inventory, provides a summary of AR's premium inventory that underpins the AM capital investment and throughput growth over the next several years.
At AR, we regularly perform a technical review of peer acreage positions, undrilled acreage and location potential based on BTU regimes and EURs.

Based on these results, we subdivided the core of the Southwest Marcellus and Ohio Utica into premium and Tier two sub areas.
We have identified approximately 5,200 premium undeveloped locations for industry in the Southwest Marcellus, which are located within the red line -- the red outlines on the map.
Of that, we estimate AR holds 1,865 of these premium locations or 36% of the total, which includes more than 1,000 liquids-rich locations.
In the Ohio Utica, we estimate roughly 1,100 premium undeveloped locations for industry, of which AR holds 210 locations or 19% of the total.
You can see that much of the acreage is covered up with existing Marcellus and Utica horizontal wellbores, which are the red lines on the map.
Ultimately, we believe the concept of inventory fatigue and the limited number of premium drilling locations will be a critical distinction between E&P operators in Appalachia.
Importantly, for AM, its primary producer, AR, has over 15 years of liquids-rich drilling inventory and a highly contiguous acreage position, which results in efficient midstream build-outs and peer-leading return on invested capital for AM.
With that, I'll turn the call over to Brendan.





Speaker :: Brendan E. Krueger -- Chief Finance Officer, Vice President of Finance & Treasurer


Thanks, Paul.
I'll begin my comments highlighting our recently published 2020 ESG report.
As a leading midstream company in one of the lowest cost basins, Antero Midstream plays a vital role in transporting and processing low emission hydrocarbons needed to power our economy and heat our communities.
Our infrastructure links reliable energy supply in Appalachia with global demand and allows us to aid in the effort to eliminate energy poverty across the world.
As depicted on slide five, titled AM's Role in Supporting Global Energy Access, AM's integrated midstream services allowed AR to transport its LPG both domestically and internationally, including to many developing nations.
Specifically, approximately 1/3 of AR's LPG exports went to developing nations in 2020, which included Nigeria, Peru and India to name a few.
This trend continued through 2021.
And importantly, we expect this trend to continue into the future.

This delivery of LPG to these communities directly improves people's health, safety and livelihood through the displacement of more expensive and carbon-intensive energy sources used for heating and cooking.
We are very proud of our role in responsibly delivering the energy needed to drive a recovering global economy and a lower carbon future.
slide number six highlights our ongoing commitment to the communities in which we operate, safe operations, environmental excellence and strong governance.
Even through the COVID-19 pandemic, we remained active in our communities, supporting hunger relief efforts through the United Way and other community organizations.
With a companywide focus on safety, we had 0 employee lost-time incidences for the sixth consecutive year.
We are also environmental leaders in the midstream industry.
In 2020, we reduced our methane leak loss rate to 0.015% and significantly below the ONE Future industry goal of 1% and more than 50% lower than the midstream industry peer average of 0.033%.

Our integrated water system allowed us to recycle and reuse 84% of AR's total wastewater gathered.
In addition, 100% of freshwater used in completions was transported by pipeline, eliminating 32 million truck traffic miles and avoiding 14,000 metric tons of CO2 equivalent.
Lastly, we took our ESG focus further by aligning our executive compensation with ESG performance and established an ESG committee.
We believe this core ESG focus and culture of continuous improvement ultimately benefits all of our stakeholders.
Now let's move on to the third quarter operational results at AM, beginning on slide seven, titled continued high asset utilization rates.
During the quarter, we maintained our high asset utilization rates with compression capacity averaging 86% utilization and processing and fractionation capacity averaging 96% and 93%, respectively.
These impressive utilization rates include the 200 million a day of incremental JV processing capacity at Smithburg one, which was placed in service at the early part of the quarter.

As detailed in the earnings release, throughput volumes were negatively impacted by approximately 100 million a day due to downtime at the Sherwood and Hopedale processing and fractionation facilities, resulting in AM not paying out the third quarter earnout of $12 million to AR.
Looking ahead to the fourth quarter, we have brought all volumes back online and expect to pay the fourth quarter earnout to AR.
Adjusted EBITDA for the quarter was $219 million, Capital expenditures during the quarter were $80 million.
Capital expenditures were slightly lower than what we discussed on last quarter's call due to the deferral of capital into the fourth quarter as a result of weather impacts.
For the full year, we still expect to be within our capital guidance range of $240 million to $260 million.
During the third quarter, we generated $94 million of free cash flow before dividends.
Year-to-date, free cash flow after dividends has totaled $32 million, which has allowed us to reduce our leverage to 3.6 times.
As we looked to the fourth quarter, we expect a modest outspend after dividends driven by increased capital expenditures, as just discussed, which will result in a full year 2021 profile that is approximately free cash flow neutral after dividends, in line with the guidance we put out there.
Moving on to the balance sheet on slide number eigth.
As of September 30, we had $521 million drawn on our bank credit facility.
As you recall, in the second quarter, we refinanced the 2024 senior notes extending the maturity to 2029 at the same coupon of five 3/8.

In October, we extended our bank maturity by five years to 2026, resulting in no senior note or debt maturities until 2026.
In addition, we elected to reduce our bank credit facility commitments from $2.13 billion to $1.25 billion.
The reduction reduces our unutilized commitment fees as viewed favorably by the credit rating agencies and reflects our long-term plan focused on absolute debt and leverage reduction.
As a reminder, we previously announced that we are targeting approximately $500 million of free cash flow after dividends from 2021 through 2025, which would result in a completely undrawn credit facility at the end of that time period, assuming that free cash flow is utilized to repay credit facility borrowings.
Importantly, our integrated long-term planning with AR provides us with significant visibility into the next five years and beyond, which gives us confidence in delivering on that outlook.
Lastly, I wanted to highlight AM's momentum on the credit front on the bottom half of the page.
So far in 2021, AM has received multiple upgrades from both S&P and Moody's, bringing us to BB and Ba2 ratings, respectively.
The upgrades reflect AM's peer-leading leverage profile, strong liquidity position, significant improvement in AR's financial strength and derisked internally financed capital budgets and dividends.
This has resulted in a much lower cost of capital for AM, which in turn helps drive value for the AM shareholders.

With that, operator, we are ready to take questions.
Operator?





