Speaker :: Anjali Aggarwal -- Head of Investor Relations


Good morning and thank you for joining us today to discuss AMG's results for the third quarter of 2021.
Before we begin, I'd like to remind you that during this call, we may make a number of forward-looking statements, which could differ from our actual results materially, and AMG assumes no obligation to update these statements.
A replay of today's call will be available on the Investor Relations section of our website, along with a copy of our earnings release and a reconciliation of any non-GAAP financial measures, including any earnings guidance announced on the call.
In addition, we posted an updated investor presentation to our website this morning and encourage investors to consult our site regularly for updated information.

With us today to discuss the company's results for the quarter are Jay Horgen, president and chief executive officer; and Tom Wojcik, chief financial officer.
With that, I'll turn the call over to Jay.









Speaker :: Jay Horgen -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Anjali, and good morning, everyone.
Growth continues to be a theme at AMG in 2021 and we are pleased with our excellent results.
Our strong third quarter again reflects the consistent execution of our strategy, which includes partnering with new affiliates operating in attractive growth areas, and supporting the continued growth of our existing affiliates.
Against the backdrop of improving flows, AMG generated year-over-year growth of 26% in EBITDA and economic earnings per share of $4, representing the strongest third quarter in our history.

Our affiliates' excellent year-to-date investment performance has resulted in higher asset levels and improving organic growth profile, and an increasing opportunity for performance fee generation.
We believe today's environment requires an active approach and we are seeing clients increase allocations to the highest-quality active managers as they position their portfolios to address the prospect of rising inflation, shifts in government behavior, and the desire to achieve impact through sustainable investing.
These behavioral changes have contributed to AMG's improving profile and strong financial results this year.
Further, our strategy is focused on investing in areas of secular growth where client demand is high, including in private markets, specialty fixed income, wealth management, Asia, and ESG.

As we execute on this strategy, not only are we growing earnings, we are simultaneously evolving our business composition toward in-demand strategies.
And over time, this ongoing shift will have an increasing impact on our long-term growth prospects.
Executing across all elements of our strategy has had and will have a significant impact on reshaping our business toward fast-growing segments of the industry.
This year alone, we have partnered with four new affiliates, including two in private markets and two dedicated to sustainable investing.

And we expect that these four affiliates will collectively contribute approximately $100 million in EBITDA in 2022.
Since 2019, this management team has added eight new affiliates, operating in areas of strong secular demand, and we completed strategic repositioning work, both at AMG and alongside our affiliates, further changing our composition and freeing up capital and resources to redeploy into our growth strategy.
The collective impact of these actions is manifesting in our flows and our overall growth profile.
Turning to new investments.

AMG has been one of the most active investors in independent asset managers over the past 24 months.
Our partnership approach is resonating with the highest-quality partner-owned investment firms.
And looking ahead, we are confident in our ability to execute on our new investment opportunity set given the favorable transaction environment, AMG's strong competitive position, and increasing demand for our unique partnership solutions.
During the quarter, we were pleased to partner with our newest affiliate, Abacus Capital Group, and welcome Ben Friedman, Kyle Ellis ,and their partners, and look forward to working with them on their strategic objectives.

With strong structural demand for multifamily real estate, Abacus is a fast-growing, high-quality business with excellent forward prospects in an attractive segment of the real estate industry.
Ben and his team were seeking a permanent strategic partner and were attracted to AMG's partnership approach, which preserves our operational autonomy and entrepreneurial culture, and enables them to continue to build an enduring, multigenerational independent real estate business.
Notably, we are now seeing opportunities to invest in illiquid managers seeking partnership solutions oriented toward incentive alignment and succession planning.
Many founder-led and private market businesses are reaching a stage in their life cycle where demographically driven leadership transactions may take place, and AMG's proven approach is uniquely attractive.

Succession planning has been and continues to be a core component of AMG's partnership approach, and together with our ability to offer growth capital and strategic capabilities, our solutions will continue to differentiate AMG as a leading institutional partner to independent firms.
In addition to evolving our business through investing in new affiliates, we are also collaborating with existing affiliates on distribution and product development within many of the same secular growth opportunities.
For example, in distribution in the second quarter, we completed the evolution of our U.S. wealth platform, AMG Funds with an overall focus on repositioning the product offering toward areas of growing demand.

As a result of this strategic evolution, we now offer an enhanced product lineup, including ESG equities, specialty fixed income, and Asian equities not previously available in the U.S. market, and we are adding resources and capital to our distribution efforts in support of this evolving product mix and the forward opportunity.
We continue to expand our suite of in-demand strategies, especially in alternatives, including both liquid and illiquid alternatives, which will further differentiate AMG and our affiliates going forward.
Recently, on the product development side, we supported Pantheon, PFM, and Artemis in developing, seeding, and launching additional private markets in ESG strategies, again, consistent with our overall focus in these secular growth areas.

Pantheon has recently filed for a listed infrastructure vehicle which will further expand their investor base as they continue to build on their position as a leading provider of private market solutions.
PFM has introduced a growth equity fund dedicated to healthcare innovation, leveraging their strong long-term track record of late-stage private markets investing within their flagship fund.
Additionally, Artemis launched its positive future fund following the recent lift out of its global sustainable equities team.
These are all great examples of how AMG's central strategic capabilities and seed capital can meaningfully support our affiliates in areas of increasing client demand.

A consistent theme across all of our client conversations today is the desire for an increasing focus on sustainable and active stewardship.
As I have said before, sustainable investing requires an active approach and our affiliates are benefiting as clients increasingly engage high-quality active managers to generate positive impact in communities worldwide.
Simultaneously, investors are also managing through an environment that has become increasingly complex and difficult to forecast and we believe that active managers, especially independent firms, are best-positioned to deliver client outcomes not replicable through passive investing.
AMG Affiliates are among the highest quality independent active managers in the world, and given their excellent performance across a number of highly differentiated in-demand strategies, AMG is well positioned to benefit from the evolving environment.

Finally, the strength and momentum in our business that I've been describing over the past several quarters continues to build.
Looking forward, we see significant opportunity for continued growth as we execute our strategy and increase our exposure to secular growth areas.
We will do this by continuing to invest in new and existing affiliates as well as leveraging AMG's strategic capabilities.
And through the consistent execution of this strategy, together with share repurchases, we will further compound our earnings and create significant shareholder value over time.

And with that, I'll turn it over to Tom to review the details of the quarter.





Speaker :: Tom Wojcik -- Chief Financial Officer


Thank you, Jay, and good morning, everyone.
Our strong third quarter results demonstrate the unique attributes of AMG's model as we continue to invest for growth.
Strong affiliate investment performance, organic growth, affiliate investments, and share repurchases combined to produce our third consecutive quarter of year-over-year earnings growth in excess of 20%, and AMG delivered net inflows as we continue to evolve our business mix toward secular growth areas.
For the quarter, adjusted EBITDA of $228 million grew 26% year over year and economic earnings per share totaled $4.

Net client cash inflows were $3.3 billion for the quarter and $6.8 billion, excluding certain quantitative strategies.
These results do not include net inflows from Parnassus which closed in early October.
Overall, net inflows were driven by strong contributions from fast-growing areas, including private markets, specialty-fixed income, wealth management, and ESG.
Turning to business performance by asset class and excluding certain quantitative strategies, in alternatives, we continue to see very strong fundraising levels across our private market managers, including Baring Asia, Pantheon, and Comvest with net inflows totaling $7.5 billion.

Client allocations to illiquid alternative strategies are increasing and we continue to be focused on enhancing our exposure through investing in existing affiliates and new partnerships, including our recently announced partnership with Abacus, which we expect to close in the fourth quarter.
Performance in this category remains strong and the management, and performance fee potential across our private markets affiliates represents a significant source of upside for the long-term earnings profile of our business.
Turning to liquid alternatives.
Net inflows were $1.4 billion, representing a continuation of the strong client demand trends we have seen against the backdrop of heightened market volatility.

This category continues to be a source of growth and significant performance fees given the outstanding investment performance across firms like ValueAct, Systematica, Capula, and Garda.
Moving to global equities, we experienced net outflows of $1.2 billion, an improvement versus the second quarter.
Sales activity continues to be strong and two-thirds of our strategies are outperforming their benchmarks on a three- and five-year basis.
We remain confident that market volatility and heightened asset dispersion present a favorable opportunity for the highest-quality active managers, including our affiliates, to deliver a differentiated value proposition to clients.

Within U.S. equities, we reported net outflows of $1.3 billion.
Performance in this category is excellent, with more than 75% of assets outperforming benchmark on a three-year basis.

equity category further toward high-client-demand areas like ESG, we are well positioned for growth going forward.
And finally, in multi-asset and fixed income, we generated inflows of $400 million as we continue to see steady growth in wealth management.
Turning to financials.
For the third quarter, adjusted EBITDA of $228 million, which includes $12 million of performance fees and net gains on strategic investments, grew 26% year over year, and economic earnings per share totaled $4.

These results were driven by strong affiliate performance in markets and additional earnings power from our recent new affiliate investments.
Now, moving to specific modeling items for the fourth quarter.
We expect adjusted EBITDA to be in the range of $290 million to $340 million based on current AUM levels, which reflect our market blend up approximately 3% through Friday.
This guidance includes a seasonally higher performance fee range of $60 million to $100 million and the full impact of Parnassus in the fourth quarter.

Taken in total, 2021 performance fees are expected to be very strong versus recent history, given excellent affiliate investment performance, particularly within liquid alternative strategies.
Our share of interest expense was $29 million for the third quarter and we expect interest expense to remain at a similar level in the fourth quarter.
Controlling interest depreciation was $2 million in the third quarter and we expect the fourth quarter to be at a similar level.
Our share of reported amortization and impairments was $36 million for the third quarter and we expect it to be approximately $43 million in the fourth quarter, reflecting recent new investment activity.

Our effective GAAP and cash tax rates were 25% and 18%, respectively, for the third quarter, and we expect GAAP and cash tax rates to remain approximately at these levels.
Intangible-related deferred taxes were $12 million this quarter and are expected to be $12 million in the fourth quarter.
Other economic items were negative $7.5 million for the third quarter.
In the fourth quarter, for modeling purposes, we expect other economic items excluding any mark-to-market impact on GP and C to be $1 million.

Our adjusted weighted average share count for the third quarter was 42.2 million and we expect our share count to be approximately 41.7 million for the fourth quarter.
Finally, turning to the balance sheet and capital allocation, our balance sheet and cash generation remain a significant source of strength as we execute on our growth strategy and return capital to shareholders.
Over the past few years, we've enhanced our balance sheet by extending duration, improving flexibility, and building capacity to support growth.
This was most recently evidenced by issuing a $200 million 40-year junior hybrid bond and completing a five-year extension of our $1.25 billion credit facility and our $350 million term loan.

On capital allocation, we will continue to be disciplined in our approach as we look to execute on our significant opportunity set to invest to support our growth strategy.
We also remain committed to returning excess cash to shareholders through share repurchases.
And in the third quarter, we repurchased $100 million of shares, bringing our year-to-date total to $390 million.
In the fourth quarter, we expect to repurchase approximately $100 million of shares, subject to market conditions and new investments.

This quarter's results reinforce our business momentum and the differentiated ways we can compound earnings growth through strong investment performance, organic growth, deployment of capital to affiliate investments, and ongoing share repurchases.
Looking forward, our earnings power and free cash flow continue to trend higher.
And as our strategy drives an increasing portion of our business toward areas of secular growth, we are well-positioned to generate sustainable shareholder value over time.
Now we're happy to take your questions.





