Speaker :: Steven O'Brien -- Vice President of Investor Relations


Thanks, Denise.
Good day, and welcome to Arrow Electronics First Quarter 2021 Earnings Conference Call.
On the call today are Mike Long, Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer; Sean Kerins, Chief Operating Officer; and Chris Stansbury, Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer.
During this call, we will make forward-looking statements, including statements about our business outlook, strategies and future financial results, which are based on our predictions and expectations as of today.
Our actual results could differ materially due to a number of risks and uncertainties, including the risk factors in our most recent 10-K and 10-Q filings with the SEC.
We undertake no obligation to update publicly or revise any of the forward-looking statements.
As a reminder, some of the figures we will discuss today on the call are non-GAAP.

We have reconciled those to the most directly comparable GAAP financial metrics in our earnings release.
These non-GAAP measures are not intended to be a substitute for our GAAP results.
You can access our earnings release at investor.
arrow.com, along with the CFO commentary, the non-GAAP earnings reconciliation and a replay of this call.
We will begin with a few minutes of prepared remarks, which will then be followed by a question-and-answer period.
I'll now hand the call to our Chairman, President and CEO, Mike Long.



Thanks, Steve.
Thanks to all of you for joining us today.
Let me begin by saying strength and stability are and have been the hallmarks of our business.
We've had the opportunity to prove this under both strong and weak demand conditions over the last 12 months.
During the first quarter, our dedicated team did their utmost to help customers manage their supply chain and get the components they need.
I'm pleased to report that our flexible business model can respond as well to the current challenge of demand outstripping supply as it did to the pandemic.
And before that, the electronic components market correction.
This flexibility is what's enabled us to deliver first quarter results across the P&L statements.
Last quarter, I said that we were seeing customers ramping production levels across many industries.

I also said we were optimistic that the post-pandemic rebound we have seen in Asia could extend to the Americas and Europe, so that both of those regions could return to growth.
Clearly, our global components business capitalized on strong demand in all regions this quarter with sales up 42% year-over-year.
We saw strong demand from key industries such as transportation, communications, consumer, electronics and industrial.
As a result, global components sales reached $6.4 billion, which is an all-time record in the company's history.
Turning to enterprise computing solutions.
Sales were in line with our expectations.
And importantly, we delivered the operational average -- leverage that we expect our investors to have.
Operating income from global components increased by more than 70% year-over-year.

This significant improvement was due to greater operating expense leverage from higher sales volumes and from favorable pricing in all regions.
We expect to further grow our operating income as the Americas and Europe regions continue to recover and as our revenue mix across all regions shifts toward a greater proportion of our higher-value component sales.
We've been saying for years that the semiconductor industry remains vibrant.
The increasing amount of electronic content and everything for us is a tailwind for our business and has also led us to a healthy platform diversification.
We experienced strong demand from nearly all key tracked verticals.
Stepping back, when I look at the reasons why past semi cycles have ended badly, I'm optimistic that a smoother landing could happen this time.
Our visibility is better than ever.
Capacity additions at fabs are currently limited, so there's no supply surge coming.

There is no longer just one product that's driving all demand like phones and PCs in the past, and we don't see shortages causing complementary products to stockpile.
And lastly, we, in cooperation with our suppliers, have been proactively managing orders and customers' expectations.
Turning to enterprise computing solutions.
Sales were in line with our expectations and billings increased at a solid rate year-over-year.
We experienced growth in infrastructure software across the portfolio, and the demand for computing drove server sales.
Operating income, which is the truest measure of our performance for enterprise computing solutions, we're pleased to once again deliver operating income growth year-over-year in the first quarter, and we expect that growth again in the second quarter.

While we are pleased with our enterprise computing solutions performance, we see strong potential for further improvements in the second half of 2021.
Rules and restrictions related to on-site work continue to change and are variable across regions, especially in Europe.
The good news is that even in Europe, we're seeing signs that IT spending priorities are shifting toward the more complex transformational projects that tend to be better aligned with our value-added focus.
In closing, I'm pleased to report that Arrow Electronics has overcome many challenges, both recently and over the company's decades of being in business.
We're currently experiencing tremendous demand, which is a first-class problem.
Our team continues to innovate, so we can deliver the best possible solutions for our customers and drive enhanced value for our shareholders.

We're optimistic about the future, and look forward to capitalizing on the positive tailwinds to build our strong momentum and improve our performance even further.
With that, I'll now hand the call over to Chris to provide more details of our first quarter results and our expectations for the second quarter.





Speaker :: Chris Stansbury -- Senior Vice President & Chief Financial Officer


Thanks, Mike.
First quarter sales increased 27% year-over-year on a non-GAAP basis.
The average euro-dollar exchange rate for the quarter was $1.20 to EUR one compared to the rate of $1.23 we had used for forecasting.
A slightly weaker euro meant that foreign exchange made a smaller contribution to growth than we anticipated.
The effective tax rate was below our expectations due to timing of certain discrete items as well as our regional profit mix.
For the full year 2021, we now expect our effective tax rate to be at the low end of our long-term range of 23% to 25%.
Beyond 2021, our ability to maintain this lower effective rate will depend on whether there are corporate tax law changes in the U.S. Turning to the balance sheet and cash flow.
First quarter operating cash flow was normally our lowest quarter and is often negative.
First quarter cash burn was approximately $5 million due to substantially stronger demand than we anticipated.

Our cash cycle of approximately 46 days improved 10 days compared to last year.
This improvement significantly aided cash flow performance in the face of working capital demand.
During the first quarter, we paid off the remaining $131 million of maturing five 1/8% notes.
Our liquidity position is the best in the history of our company and continues to improve.
During the quarter, we expanded our U.S. asset securitization program by $50 million to $1.25 billion and extended it to 2024.
Leverage, as measured by debt-to-EBITDA is the lowest level in over five years.
We returned approximately $150 million to shareholders during the first quarter through our share repurchase plan.
The remaining authorization under our existing plan is approximately $313 million.

We remain confident that share repurchases are the best use of excess cash as measured by return on invested capital and return on working capital, both of which are significantly improving.
Please keep in mind that the information I've shared during this call is a high-level summary of our financial results.
For more detail regarding the business segment results, please refer to the CFO commentary published on our website this morning.
Now turning to guidance.
Midpoint sales and EPS guidance would be all-time second quarter records.
Our forecast implies that second quarter sales and profits would be slightly above the first quarter.
Our bottoms-up forecast has not shown the usual level of positive second quarter seasonality due principally to the first quarter strength, which was above our expectations, supply constraints and lastly, the longer and later close to the first quarter.

Our guidance reflects continued strong profit leverage for global components and continued operating income growth from global enterprise computing solutions on a year-over-year basis.
Finally, as we discussed last quarter, please note the CFO commentary includes information on our fiscal calendar closing dates for 2021.
In 2021, the fourth quarter starts on October 3, unlike in 2020 when it started on September 27.
This makes the fourth quarter shorter than prior year fourth quarters.
We believe year-over-year comparisons for the second and third quarters are not affected.
And our fiscal year ends on December 31, as always.
With that, I'll turn the call over to the operator for Q&A.





