Speaker :: Selene Oh -- Head of Investor Relations


Good morning, and thank you for joining us today to discuss our quarterly results.
Statements made on this conference call regarding Franklin Resources, Inc., which are not historical facts are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
These forward-looking statements involve a number of known and unknown risks, uncertainties, and other important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from any future results, expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements.
These and other risks, uncertainties, and other important factors are just described in more detail in Franklin's recent filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including in the Risk Factors and the MD&A sections of Franklin's most recent Form 10-K and 10-Q filings.

Now, I'd like to turn the call over to Jenny Johnson, our President and Chief Executive Officer.





Speaker :: Jennifer M. Johnson -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Thank you, Selene.
Hello, everyone, and thank you for joining us today to discuss Franklin Templeton's second-quarter results.
Greg Johnson, our Executive Chairman; Matt Nicholls, our CFO; and Adam Spector, our Head of Global Distribution, are also on the call with me today.
We hope that everyone is well.
We continue to operate our business effectively with over 95% of our employees working from home, broadly speaking, we are planning for a return to office in September, though our approach will be flexible and shaped by local requirement and the status of the pandemic in the countries where we do business.

We are encouraged by the number of vaccines that are now being distributed worldwide.
Though the rollout rates obviously vary by country, the progress is very promising.
Having said that, we have been deeply concerned by the suffering that has resulted from the surge in cases in India and other parts of the world.
Our thoughts go out to our employees, to clients, who've been personally impacted by this terrible disease.
Turning now to our second fiscal quarter.
Today, we are pleased to report financial results that reflect our continued progress with revenue growth and margin expansion, resulting in a 6% increase in adjusted operating income to $581 million.
Our financial flexibility remains strong, with cash and investments of $6.2 billion at March 31, net of $250 million of debt pay down in the quarter.
After only two quarters as a combined company, we're experiencing organic growth in a number of key areas.
We're now a more robust and diversified active management business, and we're encouraged and excited by our collective potential.
Our merger has created a differentiated global firm which balances scale and specialization, and which we believe offers expanded opportunities for our stockholders, clients and employees, as well as the financial professionals with whom we partner.

Turning to performance.
We're seeing an improvement in performance across a broad base of investment strategies from the prior quarter.
More than two-thirds of our strategy composites outperformed their respective benchmarks for the four key time periods.
A number of our mutual funds rated four stars or five stars by Morningstar increased to over 140 funds this quarter.
Turning next to distribution highlights.
We're encouraged by the positive results of our new sales initiative and efforts with deep relationships.
More clients purchased both legacy Franklin Templeton and the legacy Legg Mason strategies as demonstrated by our merger wins during this quarter.
Our expanded distribution efforts drove an increase in gross sales of 32% from the prior quarter across a broad array of fund, vehicles, and asset classes led by US retail.
Long-term inflows increased by $15.9 billion or 19% quarter-over-quarter to $99.4 billion, excluding reinvested distribution.
Second-quarter long-term net outflows improved to $4.2 billion compared to $4.5 billion in the prior quarter.
Importantly, if you exclude reinvested distributions, net outflows improved by over $10 billion.

Our sales momentum continued with positive net flows in the Benefit Street Partners, Clarion Partners, ClearBridge, Fiduciary Trust International, Franklin Equity Group, Franklin Templeton Fixed Income, Martin Currie, Royce, and Western Asset.
As we said on previous call, the firm has been focused on expanding our alternatives platform, and this quarter we did.
Alternative strategies grew by $4 billion to $131 billion in assets under management, with contributions from real estate, private credit, and retail alternatives.
Clarion Partners and Benefit Street Partners, both reached record AUM levels, and K2 Alternative Strategies also contributed to positive net flows.
Fixed income inflows increased by 27% to $53.5 billion from the prior quarter due to positive contributions from a diverse group of fixed income strategies, including Core Bond, Core Plus, and Corporate.
We are pleased that Western Asset experienced net inflows of almost $10 billion in the quarter, its highest level in over a decade.
Equity inflows were $32.4 billion, consistent with the prior quarter, excluding reinvested distributions.
We continue to see strong interest in our thematic equity strategies, and while it's still early days, we're seeing progress increase interest in our value strategies.

As of this quarter's end, our institutional pipeline has increased with a combined total of won but unfunded mandates of $13 billion and is diversified across all asset classes.
Aside from our specific results for the quarter, we are also pleased to release our Corporate Social Responsibility Report in April.
We established clear goals and priorities for fiscal year 2021, ESG investing key among them and we continue to make important strides to keep our diversity inclusion efforts at the forefront.
Before we open it up to questions, I'd like to thank our outstanding teams around the globe, that could give you more extraordinary work every day on behalf of our clients and firm, and they've done so this past year under challenging circumstances.
I'm grateful for everything they do.

Now your questions.
Operator?





