Speaker :: John A. Hayes -- Chairman and Chief Executive Officer


Great.
Thank you, Frans, and good morning, everyone.
This is Ball Corporation's conference call regarding the company's first quarter 2021 results.
The information provided during this call will contain forward-looking statements.
Actual results or outcomes may differ materially from those that may be expressed or implied.
Some factors that could cause the results or outcomes to differ are in the company's latest 10-K and in other company SEC filings as well as company news releases.
If you don't already have our earnings release, it's available on our website at ball.com.
Information regarding the use of non-GAAP financial measures may also be found in the notes section of today's earnings release.
The release also includes a table summarizing business consolidation and other activities as well as a reconciliation of comparable operating earnings and diluted earnings per share calculations.

Now joining me on the call today are Scott -- are Dan Fisher, our President; and Scott Morrison, our Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer.
I'll provide some introductory remarks, Dan will discuss packaging and aerospace performance and trends, Scott will discuss key financial metrics and then I'll finish up with comments on our outlook for the company.
First, let me begin by thanking our employees.
Together, we are working safely and executing at a high level in preparation for even more growth.
Thank you for taking care of one another and living the Ball culture day in and day out.
I also want to thank our customers, suppliers and their employees.
Collectively, we are successfully navigating pandemic-related restrictions in certain regions, post-vaccine reopenings in other regions, supply shortages and disruptions across the entirety of our supply chains and investing in growth brands, sustainable aluminum packaging and scientific discovery.

The past 15 months have further showcased the resiliency of our industries as well as our ability to communicate and manage appropriately to serve growing consumer and customer demand.
2021 is off to a strong start with comparable diluted earnings per share up 18%, comparable operating earnings up 12% and global beverage volumes up 8%, despite a couple of disruptions in North and Central America beverage and aerospace that were outside of our control.
Momentum continues across our global beverage businesses.
Project execution is high, aerospace backlog is solid and hiring continues at a robust pace, all of which will fuel long-term shareholder value creation.
Even though we left a little on the table in the first quarter, nothing has changed about our prospects.
In fact, we have an even greater conviction in our ability to significantly grow diluted earnings per share, EVA dollars, cash from operations and return of value to shareholders in 2021 and beyond.

Scott will discuss this more later on.
First quarter 2021 highlights include: our global beverage business completing the start-up of four new lines and the speed-up of numerous others around the world.
Our aluminum aerosol business successfully integrating the Brazil aluminum aerosol plant acquisition.
Our cups team executing national distribution of the Ball Aluminum Cup at seven out of the 10 largest U.S. food and beverage retailers late in the quarter.
Our aerospace team continued to successfully test key instruments and win NASA contracts and study programs, and our businesses hired nearly 1,000 people net in the quarter to support our long-term growth.
We continue to put our shoulders into the areas of sustainability and Real Circularity to ensure that aluminum beverage packaging continues to be the most sustainable package in the world.

As many know, and you will hear us speak endlessly about, aluminum beverage cans already contain, on average, more than 70% recycled content, which is multiples above any other beverage package.
During the quarter, we launched the first ASI-certified can in EMEA and Ball commissioned Eunomia to produce the first U.S. state-by-state comparable assessment of recycling rates for common containers and packaging materials.
Please visit our website at ball.com/realcircularity to view our recently published 50 States Recycling Report.
As state and federal lawmakers consider recycling legislation and infrastructure investment, it's important for everyone to understand what is working and what is not when it comes to recycling in the U.S. And as an industry leader, we believe with good data, smart policies and infrastructure investment, the U.S. can be a leader in the global circular economy.

Aluminum packaging is economically advantaged, properly designed and as mentioned, offers the highest recycled content beverage solutions available to our customers today.
Increasing U.S. and global recycling rates will only accelerate growth for aluminum packaging versus other substrates and promote a truly circular economy.
So in summary, Ball is operating from a position of strength.
Our future is very bright, and our time is now.
To everyone listening, best wishes to you and your family for good health and continued safety.
And with that, I'll turn it over to our new President, Dan Fisher.
Dan?





Speaker :: Daniel Fisher -- President & Director


Thanks, John.
I echo your thanks to our employees, customers and suppliers.
Our global HR, environmental health and safety professionals and our own personal actions continue to keep our teams safe and vigilant.
As John mentioned, it was a very rewarding start to the year.
The teams are doing a great job managing accelerated growth, large-scale capacity additions and a few curveballs along the way.
We're exiting the first quarter with a lot of momentum and we'll continue to see strong performance throughout 2021.
In addition to global beverage volumes being up 8%, specialty mix increased above 49%, up from 46% at year-end 2020.
And ongoing strength in EMEA and South America beverage more than offset the winter storm impact in North America beverage, accelerated marketing investments for our retail cup launch and COVID-induced subcontractor costs in aerospace.

Demand for aluminum beverage cans continues to outstrip supply around the globe, despite Ball exiting 2020 with seven billion units of additional installed capacity.
We continue to be sold out and look forward to bringing more projects online.
Our global engineering and operations teams are executing at a high level and we anticipate exiting 2021 with an additional 12 billion units of new installed capacity, all of which underscores our Investor Day commentary: cans are in high demand, contracts are in place and Ball is well on its way to installing at least 25 billion units of global capacity by year-end 2023.
That's off of a base of 100 billion in 2019.
Our focus on speed-to-market, talent, training, systems, supply chain and operational readiness is paying off as we continue to ramp up new capacity on time and on budget.
To all the teams listening, our time is now and you are making this happen, keep up the great work.

We continue to secure new customer and supply chain contracts as well as properly aligned talent resources for the future.
As John mentioned, we have hired an additional 1,000 colleagues year-to-date, with the majority of them located in the United States.
Training and development and immersion into the Ball culture is a vital part of our day-to-day work.
Can demand across all beverage categories is strong.
Our focus on improving customer experience is bearing fruit.
Online tools like The Source, transparent customer communication and even more can availability will continue to aid that trend.
We also continue to make significant progress in operationalizing sustainability.
I'm proud to say that in addition to our EMEA segment achieving ASI Certification in 2020, our operations in South America and North America are on track to achieve ASI certification by year-end 2021.

In addition, last week, we recognized the 2020 Hoover Sustainability Award Global winners.
We commend all of our global colleagues and our global supply chain for their commitment to our sustainability journey.
As we discussed throughout 2020, growth in our global beverage business is accelerating, and our product portfolio continues to support our customers' new brands as well as broaden the addressable market for aluminum cans, bottles and cups.
Given market characteristics and our project execution, I'm very positive about our ability to achieve our goals and deliver low double-digit global volume growth and global specialty mix in excess of 50% in 2021.
We continue to see the global industry growing at an annual rate in excess of 6% for the foreseeable future.
As a reminder, for those of you newer to the industry, that is two times the historical CAGR and puts the industry on track to grow at least 100 billion units by 2025.

Ball is well positioned to capture at least 45 billion units of that growth given our scale and innovation in the world's largest can markets.
Looking out, contractual terms and conditions are favorable and long-standing pass-through mechanisms for aluminum and other items are in place.
These include our lift customer terms and conditions that will enable us to ensure full pass-through as inflation begins to ramp up.
And as we said on last quarter's earnings, now we execute, execute, execute.
Now a few comments on each region.
In North America, beverage first quarter volumes were up 6% and specialty mix improved to 37%.
During the quarter, earnings were down slightly due to the combined effect of project start-up costs and lost production from winter storms, more than offsetting the benefit of improved volume and mix.
We anticipate both our Glendale and Pittston facilities to exit 2021 with four can manufacturing lines installed, and our Bowling Green ends manufacturing plant will pull forward its start-up to the fourth quarter of 2021.

Across the customer base, beverage can demand is strong across all brand categories: alcohol, soft drinks, energy and water.
We expect this favorable trend to continue and will support additional EVA-enhancing opportunities to align with long-duration contracts.
As we have discussed on prior calls, given three plants coming online in North America, full year start-up costs are expected to be in the range of $50 million.
The impacts of these costs will be weighted more in the first half.
In EMEA, segment volume for the first quarter was up 5% and specialty mix was 54%.
Across Ball's EMEA business, demand trends and positive momentum continues.
We foresee European beverage can volumes up mid-single digits throughout 2021 and beyond.
Future growth will be driven by new and existing categories utilizing cans and additional regional plant opportunities emerging to fulfill market demand in the biggest can markets across EMEA.

In South America, first quarter volumes were up 14% and specialty mix increased to nearly 68%, despite only 80% to 85% of delivery channels being open during the recent resurgence of the virus.
We continue to see more upside in South America and the Frutal, Brazil plant as well as other projects are progressing very well.
We are also anticipating further investments both in Brazil and throughout the region.
Similar to our prior commentary, we anticipate can growth in the mid-to-high teens and can mix on the shelf returning to even higher levels beyond 2020 once we have more capacity online.
In summary, our global beverage team did an amazing job navigating some uncontrollables during the quarter while also executing at a high level on the things we can control.
Sticking with aluminum packaging.
Our aluminum aerosol team did a stellar job managing costs and preparing for reopenings, lifting the odorant and personal care demand.

Both earnings and volume increased slightly in the quarter, and the team continues to amplify the sustainability credentials of our extruded aluminum bottles to deliver innovation across multiple brand categories.
Our cups team continue to execute and prepare for an exciting 2021.
In addition to the retail launch John mentioned, the team recently kicked off "the party starts here" marketing campaign to engage and educate consumers preparing for a summer filled with infinitely recyclable aluminum cups.
We will continue to invest marketing dollars behind the cups retail launch in 2021 and expect our cups business to turn a profit starting in 2022.
Turning to aerospace.
The team continued to win contracts during the quarter, including building the spacecraft for NASA's heliophysics GLIDE mission, which will study Earth's exosphere, which is where Earth's atmosphere touches space.

The GLIDE spacecraft and NOAA's Space Weather Follow On spacecraft, also being built by Ball and we'll study solar winds and forecast solar weather will launch together in the future.
The aerospace business also dealt with transitory costs due to a first quarter subcontractor rate adjustment associated with the national defense contract and inefficiencies brought about by the current COVID environment.
This rate adjustment does not impede the near- or long-term growth prospects for the business.
I'm happy to address any of those questions during Q&A.
Our team also executed on new infrastructure, completed critical testing on multiple instruments, won new study programs and backlog remains solid.
We continue to be very excited about the business and appreciate all of the amazing work being done by the aerospace team.
With that, I'll turn it over to Scott.





Speaker :: Scott C. Morrison -- Executive Vice President & Chief Financial Officer


Thanks, Dan.
Comparable first quarter 2021 diluted earnings per share were $0.72 versus $0.61 in 2020, an increase of 18%.
First quarter comparable diluted earnings per share reflects strong global beverage results, favorable FX, lower interest expense and a lower effective tax rate, offset by previously discussed higher year-over-year corporate, labor and start-up costs to support business growth and marketing costs to drive the aluminum cup launch.
Ball's balance sheet is very healthy with ample liquidity and flexibility.
As we sit here today, some additional key metrics to keep in mind for 2021.
Our full year effective tax rate on comparable earnings will now be in the range of 18%.
Full year interest expense will be in the range of $275 million.
And full year corporate undistributed costs recorded in other nonreportable are now expected to be in the range of $90 million.

We continue to see a path to doubling our cash from operations by 2025.
Our 2021 cash from operations will grow in line with the earnings trajectory and be aided by a source in working capital.
We expect 2021 total capex to exceed $1.5 billion and returns on capital beyond our 9% after-tax hurdle rate will follow through as new growth capital products become operational later in the year and in the years to come.
Ball continues to be good stewards of our cash and as fellow owners and in alignment with our EVA discipline, we'll prudently balance real-time growth opportunities with consistent return of value to our shareholders via dividends and share repurchases.
Given the first quarter's strength and approaching our net leverage target range as we progress through 2021, I see returning that value in a more meaningful way sooner rather than later.
With that, I'll turn it back to you, John.





Speaker :: John A. Hayes -- Chairman and Chief Executive Officer


Great.
Thanks, Scott, and thanks, Dan.
In summary, our Drive for 10 vision serves us very well, whether it be broadening our geographic expansion developing new customers, markets and products and doing so with a commitment to being close to our customers and with uncompromising integrity.
Following our strong first quarter results and outlook for the remainder of the year, we are even better positioned to exceed our comparable diluted earnings per share long-term goal of 10% to 15% and exceed our EVA dollar growth goals of 4% to 8% per year in 2021 and beyond.
We will work together to do everything possible to work safely, execute on capital investments, drive the circular economy and generate significant earnings, cash, EVA and value for our shareholders.
And with that, Frans, we're ready for questions.





