Speaker :: Jennifer Childe -- Vice President, Investor Relations


Thank you, operator.
Good morning and thank you for joining us on CNO Financial Group's third quarter 2020 earnings conference call.
Today's presentation will include remarks from Gary Bhojwani, Chief Executive Officer and Paul McDonough, Chief Financial Officer.
Following the presentation, we will also have several other business leaders available for the question-and-answer period.

During this conference call, we will be referring to information contained in yesterday's press release.
You can obtain the release by visiting the Media section of our website at cnoinc.com.
This morning's presentation is also available in the Investors section of our website and was filed in a Form 8-K yesterday.
We expect to file our Form 10-Q and post it on our website on or before November 6th.

Let me remind you that any forward-looking statements we make today are subject to a number of factors, which may cause actual results to be materially different than those contemplated by the forward-looking statements.
Today's presentations contain a number of non-GAAP measures, which should not be considered as substitutes for the most directly comparable GAAP measures.
You'll find a reconciliation of the non-GAAP measures to the corresponding GAAP measures in the appendix.
Throughout the presentations, we will be making performance comparisons and unless otherwise specified, any comparisons made will be referring to changes between third quarter 2019 and third quarter 2020.

And with that, I'll turn the call over to Gary.





Speaker :: Gary C. Bhojwani -- Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Jennifer.
Good morning everyone and thank you for joining us.
I'm very pleased with our record third quarter financial performance.
These results underscore the continued strength of our model and the resiliency of our business during these unprecedented times.
When I look back at what we've accomplished over the past 10 months, I'm extremely proud of our associates, agents and leadership team.

In January, we announced our enterprise transformation and began the process of realigning our three segments into two divisions.
Even before COVID, changing consumer behaviors and expectations drove this decision.
As part of our long-term plan, we knew we needed to adjust our model to enable us to better reach consumers how and where they want to do business.

CNO has a unique set of capabilities in our 5,000-agent strong exclusive distribution force and our top five direct-to-consumer business.
It's the combination of these businesses that allows us to pursue our current strategy.
COVID-19 accelerated a shift in consumer buying behaviors that was already under way and sparked other changes that we could not have predicted.
Many of these changes may prove to be permanent.
The pandemic also accelerated our transformation.

In March, we deployed enhanced technology tools and training to enable our agents to continue to serve customers through virtual consultations and digital insurance applications.
In response to new customer and worksite employer needs, we began advancing our own strategic plans and technology investments.
By fast-tracking various digital direct-to-consumer and cross-channel collaboration programs, we accomplished in about six weeks what was originally expected to take more than six months.
Throughout this unprecedented year, our teams have pulled together to support our agent force, rebuild sales and drive productivity and efficiency gains, all while serving our customers with minimal disruption.

I'd like to take a moment to thank the customers that put their trust in us every day and our agents and associates that work so tirelessly to deliver on our promises.
This quarter CNO was certified as a great place to work in our first year participating in the survey.
We are very proud of this recognition.
Our people truly make CNO a great place to work.

Turning to Slide 4.
We continue to operate from a position of strength.
Operating earnings were up 63% and operating earnings per share were up 76%.
We're seeing continued sequential improvement in nearly all of our key metrics and premium collections continue unabated across both divisions.
The overall product margin in the quarter was robust due primarily to fewer health claims as consumers deferred medical care.
Even excluding these and other factors, which we believe are largely temporary, our insurance product margin remained strong, up $3 million or 1%.

Discretionary spending was strictly controlled and our capital and liquidity positions remained solid.
We ended the quarter with an RBC ratio of 428% and $236 million in cash at the holding company.
These levels are after returning $67 million to shareholders, including $50 million in stock buybacks.

Turning to our growth scorecard on Slide 5.
Three of our five metrics were up year-over-year.
Life sales were up at solid 19% fueled by both continued strong direct-to-consumer growth and exclusive field agent sales.
Health sales showed significant sequential improvement, but remained down 16% over the prior year.
Overall, life and health sales were essentially flat this quarter relative to the prior-year period, which reflects a marked improvement over last quarter sales.
Insurance collected premium growth accelerated to 3.3% driven by continued strong persistency and cumulative sales growth over the past year in life and health.

Turning to our Consumer Division on Slide 6.
The COVID-19 crisis continues to draw attention to the critical need for insurance products among our consumer base.
Sales of life insurance remained strong in the third quarter while supplemental health and long-term care rebounded nicely.
Our Medicare supplement sales remained challenged.
Life insurance sales were up 25% for the quarter and up 19% year-to-date.
Direct-to-consumer life sales were up 23% which comprised just over half of our total life sales.
Life sales generated by our exclusive field agents were up 29%, the highest growth rate we've experienced in several years.

As you know, our consumer channels have been managed as a single division since February.
Our third quarter results demonstrate the strength of this unified distribution model and the synergies that are being unlocked.
Direct-to-consumer leads are being shared with field agents earlier in the sales cycles.
Customers are now choosing whether to transact with us online, over the phone, in person with a local agent for a more personalized service or some combination of the three.
This integrated blend of digital and local agent service allows us to build deeper, more meaningful relationships with our client and establish a level of trust that is difficult to replicate.
As a result, a growing portion of our field sales are coming from consumers who contacted us for a direct purchase, did not buy a policy upon initial contact, but later opted to purchase a plan from one of our exclusive agents in their community.
This ability to flex our resources has translated to higher lead conversion rates and lower marketing costs per application written.

The same dynamic applies to our health business.
We are implementing various initiatives on the health side to provide consumers with the similar unified multi-channel sales and service experience.
One example is our recently launched online health insurance marketplace, myHealthPolicy.com, focused on helping Medicare beneficiaries enroll in Medicare Advantage and prescription drug plans.

For the past few years, senior preferences have been shifting from Medicare supplement to Medicare Advantage products.
While we have been selling third party MA products for some time, our new program leapfrogs our previous efforts.
Our new platform leverages our direct-to-consumer experience with the strength of our local exclusive agent force.
During this year's Medicare annual enrollment period, consumers can purchase Medicare products from us online or from one of our 2,800 telesales and local exclusive field agents who are certified to sell Medicare plans.
Our agents now have the ability to sell our own Medicare supplement plans and third party Medicare Advantage and prescription drug plans.
We believe we have the largest exclusive agent force certified for MA sales.

We've seen steady sequential improvement in our producing agent count since the start of the pandemic.
During the second quarter at the height of the pandemic our producing agent count was down as much as 26%.
It has since rebounded nicely up 9% sequentially driven by higher retention and an uptick in new agent recruiting.

Turning to Slide 7 and our Worksite Division.
Collected premiums remained strong as the profile of our existing employer groups has translated to continued healthy levels of employee persistency.
We saw a significant sequential improvement in our worksite sales in the third quarter with sales up 48% over the second quarter.
Relative to the year-ago period, however, sales were down 56%.
Given recent increases in COVID infection rates across the country, we continue to expect a steeper path to recovery in the worksite business.

As workplace dynamics have changed, we've been focused on helping our existing clients navigate through COVID.
We have made significant progress enhancing our digital capabilities to offer enrollment by telephone, video conference or online.
These virtual programs drove almost 30% of our sales in the quarter.
Web benefits design continues to play a key role in accelerating these initiatives.

We recently launched several pilots to deliver more holistic employer solutions, including leveraging third party products and targeted marketing to specific sectors.
We are also accelerating the training of our veteran worksite agents on WBD technology to enable them to sell benefits, technology and enrollment services.
This cross-selling activity provides a more complete solution to our employer clients and provides additional scale to WBD.
While still early, we are encouraged by the initial reception to the pilots.
Similar to our consumer business as various initiatives move from pilot to scale, we will provide additional updates.

Turning to Slide 8.
We returned $67 million to shareholders in the third quarter, including $50 million in share buybacks.
Year-to-date we have deployed $163 million on buybacks.
With our higher cash balance and RBC ratio, we have the capacity to repurchase significantly more shares during the quarter.
We made a conscious and well-considered decision to take a measured approach.
We expect to have the continued capacity to repurchase shares in the fourth quarter and will remain prudent as we carefully monitor the evolving circumstances.

And with that, I'll turn it over to Paul.





Speaker :: Paul H. McDonough -- Chief Financial Officer


Thanks, Gary, and good morning everyone.
I'll begin by providing a bit more detail on our third quarter results and then share our outlook for the balance of the year.

Turning to the financial highlights on Slide 9.
As Gary mentioned, operating earnings per share were up 76% benefiting from favorable health margin due to customer deferral of care, strong net investment income and strict expense control.
Earnings were also favorably impacted by our continued strong free cash flow funding share repurchases that reduced our share count by 9% year-over-year.
Allocated and unallocated expenses decreased by 4% in the aggregate, driven by general expense discipline as well as decreased travel and marketing related expenses.

Fee income declined by $2.2 million compared to the prior-year quarter, driven by $3.3 million of expenses related to our myHealthPolicy.com online marketing initiative.
Operating return on equity, excluding significant items, was 11.9% through September 30, 2020, which compares to 10.6% in the prior-year period both on a trailing 12-month basis.

Turning to Slide 10 and our product level results.
Our margin in the third quarter included a net favorable impact of $42 million related to COVID.
The annuity margin reflects an unfavorable impact of approximately $7 million from higher persistency related to COVID.
This drove volatility in the accounting for the embedded derivative reserves in our fixed index annuities.
The health margin included approximately $58 million of favorable impacts related to COVID driven by the release of prior period claim reserve redundancies due to claim levels continuing to trend below pre-COVID levels.
And our life margin in the third quarter included approximately $9 million of unfavorable impacts related to COVID.
Insurance product margin, excluding all COVID impacts, was up $3 million or 1%, which reflects the strength of our underlying business and the benefits from our diverse product suite.

Turning to Slide 11 and our investment results.
Investment income allocated to products was essentially flat as the impact of the 4% increase in net insurance liabilities and related investments was largely offset by an 18 basis point year-over-year decline in the average yield on those investments to 4.88%.
Sequentially, the average yield declined 4 basis points consistent with our prior guidance.

Investment income not allocated to products increased $9 million year-over-year to $43.7 million, driven by strong alternative investment performance.
Our new money rate of 4.08% was down 58 basis points year-over-year and down 41 basis points sequentially.
This reflects $582 million in funds invested in assets with an average rating of A- and an average duration of 12 years.

Turning to Slide 12 and an overview of our investment portfolio.
At quarter-end, our invested assets were $26 billion, up 6% year-over-year.
As you can see from the slide, approximately 96% of our fixed maturity portfolio is investment grade with an average rating of A. The BBB allocation comprised 41% of our investment grade holdings, consistent with the prior quarter.
As you can see on Page 24 of our earnings presentation, we remain underinvested in most sectors generally considered to be high risk in the context of the pandemic, including energy, airlines, gaming, hotels, non-essential retail and restaurants.

Turning to Slide 13.
We continued to generate strong free cash flow to the holding company in the third quarter with excess cash flow of $95 million or 84% of operating income this quarter and $280 million or 79% of operating income on a trailing 12-month basis.
As Gary mentioned, we returned $67 million to shareholders in the quarter, including dividends of $17 million and share repurchases of $50 million.

Turning to Slide 14.
At quarter-end, our consolidated RBC ratio was 428%, up from 405% at June 30th, reflecting the very strong operating results in the quarter.
This represented approximately $140 million excess capital relative to the high end of our targeted range of 375% to 400%.
Our Holdco liquidity at quarter-end was $236 million, which represents $86 million of excess capital relative to our target minimum Holdco liquidity of $150 million.
We have intentionally maintained a more conservative posture in the context of the ongoing uncertainty, particularly as new COVID cases continue to increase sharply across the country.

Turning to Slide 15 and our outlook for the remainder of the year.
We most recently updated our forecast in October, applying base and adverse scenarios that are generally aligned with certain rating agency assumptions regarding COVID-19 infection rates and death rates and related economic impacts.

From a top line perspective in our base case, we expect a continuation of the positive momentum we demonstrated in the third quarter.
As additional data points through the third week in October, first, direct-to-consumer sales were up 3%.
While this reflects a deceleration relative to recent sales levels, it is due almost entirely to a planned reduction in advertising spending because of higher ad costs close to the election.
Our approach to marketing spending has always been to put our foot on the gas when pricing is opportunistic and to pull back when pricing is less attractive.

Second, consumer life and health sales in total were up 20%.
Third, annuity collected premiums were up 9%.
And fourth worksite life and health sales in total were down 47%.

From an earnings perspective, in the fourth quarter of 2020 we expect the COVID impact on insurance margin to be net favorable though to a lesser extent compared to the impact in the third quarter as healthcare claims are exhibiting a trend toward more normal levels.
Our base case scenario assumes that a COVID-19 vaccine will be available in the middle part of next year and that infections will persist through the early part of 2022.
We have revised our estimated COVID mortality impact across all of our products, both life and health to $68,000 per 1,000 US deaths down from $130,000 per 1,000 US deaths in our prior forecast.
The difference reflects refinements to our model.
We shifted from a per policy focus to a focus on the face amount for our life business.
We also applied a factor to our life blocks to adjust for certain underwriting characteristics.

Expenses in total are expected to be up in the fourth quarter compared to the prior-year period, driven by an acceleration of various digital and technology investments to better position the Company for the future.
Consistent with our prior guidance, this will result in total expenses for the second half of 2020 flat to 2019, adjusting for the significant items in the fourth quarter of 2019.

From a capital and liquidity perspective, even in the adverse case we expect to maintain our capital and liquidity targets, maintain our quarterly dividend to shareholders and have the capacity to continue share repurchases.
We'll provide more color on our outlook for 2021 on our fourth quarter earnings call as our outlook today remains cloudy due to lack of visibility in a number of areas.

And with that, I'll turn it back over to Gary.





Speaker :: Gary C. Bhojwani -- Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Paul.
I'm very pleased with the steady operating improvement we've delivered and the solid execution of our strategic priorities in what continues to be a very challenging environment.
When we announced our strategic transformation in January, we could not have predicted what would follow over the subsequent 10 months.

Unifying our channels continues to unlock value for CNO and strengthens our position to navigate the pandemic.
When coupled with the steps we have taken in recent years to reduce our long-term care exposure, derisk our investment portfolio and diversify our product suite, CNO is well prepared for the economic challenges that lie ahead.
I'm confident that we're on the right path to successfully grow our business, help secure the future of middle-income America and drive further enhancements to shareholder value.

I can't conclude our call today without acknowledging that it's election day.
Over the last three months we've encouraged our associates to exercise their civic right to vote.
I extend that encouragement to everyone on the call as well.
I hope you will vote today if you haven't done so already.
Please continue to stay healthy and safe.
Thank you for your interest in and support of CNO Financial Group.

We will now open it up for questions.
Operator?





