Speaker :: John Stewart -- Senior Vice President of Investor Relations


Thank you, Andrea.
The speakers on today's call are CEO Bill Stein and CFO Andy Power.
Chief Investment Officer Greg Wright, Chief Technology Officer Chris Sharp, and EVP of Sales and Marketing Corey Dyer are also on the call and will be available for Q&A.
Management may make forward-looking statements, including guidance and underlying assumptions.

Forward-looking statements are based on expectations that involve risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to differ materially.
For a further discussion of risks related to our business, see our 10-K and subsequent filings with the SEC.
This call will contain non-GAAP financial information.
Reconciliations to net income are included in the supplemental package furnished to the SEC and available on our website.



Before I turn the call over to Bill, I'd like to hit the tops of the waves on our fourth-quarter results.
We delivered high-quality quarterly bookings in terms of total volume, as well as the product mix, geographic split and the number of new logos landing on PlatformDIGITAL.
We extended our global platform, entering Greece with the acquisition of the leading colocation interconnection provider in Southeastern Europe and securing customer growth in existing markets around the world with key land purchases and new builds.
We delivered solid financial results with core FFO per share $0.08 ahead of consensus, driven by operational outperformance.

We further strengthened the balance sheet, lowering our weighted average cost of debt with the redemption of high-coupon debt and preferred equity while extending our weighted average duration with the issuance of attractively priced long-term capital.
With that, I'd like to turn the call over to Bill.





Speaker :: Bill Stein -- Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, John.
Good afternoon, and thank you all for joining us.
The fourth quarter capped off a transformational year for Digital Realty.
We acquired several highly connected assets, including the Westin Building in North America and Interxion in EMEA, along with the leading colocation and interconnection providers in Southeastern Europe, significantly expanding our platform in EMEA while trimming noncore assets in North America.

We delivered record bookings for the full year, an extraordinary performance under any set of circumstances but particularly amid the headwinds of a global pandemic.
Our business is increasingly global.
In 2020, we nearly doubled the number of countries where Digital Realty has a presence, and EMEA accounted for more than half our fourth-quarter bookings, the first time ever a majority of our bookings has been outside the Americas.
We more than doubled our cross-connect count in 2020, reflecting the growing concentration of network-dense, highly connected assets on PlatformDIGITAL.

We landed a record number of new logos in 2020, more than twice as many as our previous record, in fact, driving consistent growth in our enterprise colocation and interconnection business.
The vibrant communities on our campus environments are attracting a growing set of new customers, diversifying and solidifying our revenue streams.
Service providers and enterprises alike are strengthening their partnership with a select number of trusted global data center partners to help meet their growing needs around the world, and Digital Realty is uniquely well-positioned to serve as their partner of choice.
Let's turn to our sustainable growth initiatives here on Page 3.

In October, we formally committed to reducing direct and indirect emissions by 68% and indirect emissions in our value chain by area by 24% by 2030, in line with a 1.5-degree climate change scenario.
We set our target with science-based targets initiative, along with over 1,000 organizations that have committed to reduce emissions.
And we also signed the UN Global Compact business ambition for 1.5-degree C, joining leading companies who have committed to ambitious carbon-reduction targets.
In early December, we announced that our operations in France were on target to achieve a carbon-neutral footprint by the end of the year and are expected to remain carbon neutral through 2030 for both existing facilities and future expansion based on Scope 1 and 2 emissions.

In mid-December, we were honored to receive Nareit's Leader in the Light Award for data center sustainability for the fourth consecutive year.
In early January, we issued our fifth green bond, extending our lead as the largest U.S. REIT issuer bonds committed to sustainable investments.
Our green bond framework is aligned with leading global best practices, including GRESB's green bond principles, as well as the UN Sustainable Development Goals.

And Sustainalytics has provided an independent second-party opinion, concluding that our green bond program is considered robust, credible and transparent.
We are committed to minimizing our impact on the environment while simultaneously meeting the needs of our customers, our investors, our employees and the broader society.
In terms of our social efforts, we recently selected diversity, equity and inclusion as one of four companywide philanthropic areas of focus, in addition to sustainability, disaster relief and STEM education.
As you may be aware, Nareit recently instituted a dividend through diversity and inclusion program, which I am honored to be co-chairing, along with Tom Baltimore of Park Hotels and Debbie Cafaro of Ventas.

Dividends through diversity will promote the recruitment, inclusion and advancement of women, minorities and other underrepresented groups in REITs in the broader commercial real estate industry.
We have also joined leaders across 85 industries in signing the CEO pledge on CEO Action for Diversity & Inclusion, an initiative that aims to rally the business community to advance diversity and inclusion in the workplace and to cultivate a trusting environment where employees feel empowered to have discussions on these topics.
Participating in these programs and others like them is critical to our industry's future because it is the right thing to do and because we serve a broad, diverse community.
And we believe that to help our customers prepare for the future, we need industry professionals whose insights and perspectives reflect the communities we serve.

We are doing our best to play a constructive, proactive role in advancing our broader goal of delivering sustainable growth for all our stakeholders, investors, customers, employees and the communities we serve around the world.
Let's turn now to our investment activity on Page 4.
We continue to expand our global platform with the acquisition of the leading colocation and interconnection provider in Southeastern Europe, groundbreakings in existing markets across EMEA and strategic land purchase on the continent and in Asia Pacific.
In early November, we acquired Lamda Helix, the largest carrier-neutral colocation and interconnection provider in Greece, led by an accomplished management team who will continue to manage the business.

As leading service providers continue to expand their footprint, we expect Greece and other parts of Southeastern Europe will be major beneficiaries.
We are well-positioned to capture the key cloud and connectivity deployments that will accelerate the region's digital transformation.
In Denmark, we began construction on our third data center, adjacent to the two existing facilities on our Copenhagen campus and offering direct access to leading global cloud providers, numerous networks, Internet exchanges and a transatlantic subsea cable system.
We also broke ground on a new data center in Zurich, where we've seen robust demand from leading global service providers.

The expansion of our Zurich campus will provide runway for customer growth at the leading cloud and interconnection hub in Switzerland.
We also acquired a land parcel within one kilometer of our highly interconnected campus in Vienna.
And halfway around the globe, in Sydney, we are under contract to acquire two parcels that will support the development of up to 250 megawatts.
These strategic land holdings will provide additional capacity, enabling local and global service providers to seamlessly expand adjacent to their existing deployments.

Let's turn to Page 5 for an update on the Interxion integration.
The successful integration of Interxion was our top priority for 2020, and we made excellent progress despite the pandemic.
We have built a solid foundation for the assimilation of our businesses, and we are well on our way to achieving the objectives and synergies we outlined when we first announced the transaction.
I'm proud of what we've accomplished to date and excited about our prospects as we move into the implementation phase in 2021.

When we announced the transaction, we stated that the combined company would have enhanced capabilities to address and solve the public and hybrid cloud architecture requirements of our global customer base that would allow us to build upon each company's current relationships with leading global customers while also enabling us to effectively compete in the broader target markets.
The early results are very promising.
We've enjoyed excellent success with global platform providers, and early cross-selling wins have surpassed expectations with numerous referrals between the sales teams.
The significant embedded growth potential was another key element of the Interxion investment thesis.

We believe the combined organization has already created significant long-term value by executing on the existing development pipeline, acquiring the freehold to the land under key positions in Frankfurt and Paris and securing land in key markets to support future growth.
Let's turn to demand drivers on Page 6.
We continue to be fortunate to be operating in a business levered to secular demand drivers.
As the leading global data center provider, we have a unique vantage point that enables us to detect secular trends as they emerge.

We recently introduced the Data Gravity Index, which measures, quantifies and forecasts the growing intensity of the enterprise data-creation life cycle and its gravitational impact on global IT infrastructure.
This groundbreaking index is a byproduct of our market intelligence analysis, as well as our obsessive focus on understanding customers' deployments and supporting their evolving infrastructure needs.
Recent third-party research continues to support the growing relevance of Data Gravity.
According to the market intelligence firm, IDC, 80% of the world's data will reside within enterprises by the year 2025.

A 451 Research global IT leader survey recently found that 87% of IT leaders will need to maintain local copies of critical data at global points of presence to meet regulatory requirements.
We continue to see these indicators as enterprises expand their private data infrastructure deployments and integrate data exchange with adjacent business and service provider partners across our global platform.
Digital Realty recently received Frost & Sullivan's APAC Data Center Strategy Innovator Award, recognizing PlatformDIGITAL for providing an innovative global platform, enabling enterprises to scale digital transformation in a consistent, modular fashion and addressing the unique infrastructure requirements for integrating private data flows across multiple public platforms.
We are honored by the strong validation of our platform and our market-leading innovation to meeting the needs of our global data center customer base.

Given the resiliency of the demand drivers underpinning our business and the relevance of our platform in meeting these needs, we believe that we are well-positioned to continue to deliver sustainable growth for customers, shareholders and employees, whatever the macro environment may hold in store.
With that, I'd like to turn the call over to Andy to take you through our financial results.





Speaker :: Andy Power -- Chief Financial Officer


Thank you, Bill.
Let's turn to our leasing activity on Page 8.
We signed total bookings of $130 million in the fourth quarter, including a $12 million contribution from interconnection.
Network and enterprise-oriented deals of one megawatt or less totaled $31 million, building upon the consistent momentum throughout the year and demonstrating the growing success of PlatformDIGITAL as we continue to capture a greater share of enterprise demand.

The weighted average lease term was over eight years.
We secured 120 new logos during the quarter with more than half of those new logos landing in EMEA, again, demonstrating the power of our global platform.
EMEA accounted for more than half of our fourth-quarter bookings, while Asia Pacific contributed over 15%.
As Bill mentioned, this was the first time the majority of our bookings were outside the Americas.

In terms of specific wins during the quarter and around the world, a rapidly growing cloud-based cybersecurity provider selected PlatformDIGITAL for multiple environments in London and Boston to facilitate modernization and embrace high-performance compute technology while maintaining an exceptional user experience.
In New York, the Digital Realty's team's deep understanding of a global retailer's growth strategy enabled us to tailor a solution for their Americas markets on PlatformDIGITAL.
We also overcame lockdowns and international travel restrictions to demonstrate to a digital telecom provider how they can leverage PlatformDIGITAL to meet their current and future growth requirements in existing and targeted markets at their required pace.
A rapidly growing gaming platform expanded their edge to rewire their network and optimize data exchange with third-party clouds, the growth of their existing footprint with us in Northern Virginia and a new deployment in Chicago.

Likewise in Chicago, a global exchange operator leveraged PlatformDIGITAL to extend their access into our highly interconnected community.
In Singapore, two leading global financial services firms expanded with Digital Realty due to our platform offering and long history of operational excellence, while a software developer selected PlatformDIGITAL to expand their proprietary cloud offering into the region.
Turning to our backlog on Page 10.
The current backlog of leases signed but not yet commenced reached an all-time high of $269 million.

The step-up from $229 million last quarter reflects $70 million of commencements during the fourth quarter, offset by roughly $118 million of combined space and power leases signed.
The lag between signings and commencements was a bit longer than our long-term historical average at 8.5 months.
Moving on to renewal leasing activity on Page 11.
We signed $156 million of renewals during the fourth quarter, in addition to new leases signed.

The weighted average term loan renewals signed during the fourth quarter was a little over three years, reflecting a roughly even split in the mix between deals above and below one megawatt.
Cash releasing spreads on renewals were plus 1%, and cash rents were positive on renewals above and below one megawatt, an encouraging sign for pricing.
We retained 79% of expiring leases, in line with our long-term historical average.
In terms of fourth-quarter operating performance, overall portfolio occupancy improved 40 basis points, driven primarily by leases commencing on recent deliveries in Ashburn and the sale of a vacant building in Amsterdam.

Same-capital occupancy was down 40 basis points from the third quarter due to no move-outs, partially offset by positive absorption in Silicon Valley and Chicago.
Same-capital cash NOI growth has continued to improve since bottoming in 2019 and ticked up slightly to negative 1.6% in the fourth quarter.
For the full year, same-capital cash NOI growth was negative 1.9% or a little over 100 basis points better than initially expected.
As a reminder, the Westin Building, Interxion, Lamda Helix, and Altus IT are not yet included in the same-store pool, but we expect each of these acquisitions will be accretive to our organic growth going forward.

Turning to our economic risk mitigation strategies on Page 12.
The U.S. dollar softened in the second half of the year, providing a bit of an FX tailwind in the fourth quarter relative to the prior-year average.
Overall, FX represented roughly a 50-basis-point tailwind to the year-over-year growth in our reported results.

As a reminder, we manage currency risk by issuing locally denominated debt to act as a natural hedge, so only our net assets within a given region are exposed to currency risk from an economic perspective.
In terms of vertical concentration, as you can see from the pie chart on the upper right, we are fortunate to be primarily serving customers whose businesses are thriving in the current environment with limited exposure to the sectors most negatively impacted.
Rent collections remain in line with our historical average, and requests for rent relief have largely subsided.
In addition to managing credit risk and foreign currency exposure, we also mitigate interest rate risk by proactively terming out short-term variable-rate debt with longer-term fixed-rate financing.

Given our strategy of matching the duration of our long-lived assets with long-term fixed-rate debt, a 100-basis-point move in LIBOR would have roughly a 50-basis-point impact on our full-year FFO per share.
Our near-term funding and refinancing risk is very well managed, and our capital plan is fully funded.
In terms of earnings growth, the fourth-quarter core FFO per share was down 0.6% year over year but $0.08 ahead of consensus, driven primarily by operational outperformance.
For the full year, core FFO per share came in $0.22 or nearly 4% ahead of our initial guidance.

As previewed on our third-quarter call, we expect to deliver double-digit revenue growth, driven by a full-year contribution from Interxion and the record colocation and interconnection and overall bookings in 2020.
We expect the EBITDA margin will remain in line with the fourth quarter throughout 2021.
As Bill mentioned, we remain on track to achieve the synergies we underwrote on the Interxion transaction, although the rationale for the deal has always been accelerating revenue growth rather than realizing expense synergies.
We have already made great strides on our financing plans for the year with a highly successful 1 billion green euro bond offering in early January at five-eighths, in addition to solid progress on the capital recycling front.

As always, we expect to remain nimble for the rest of the year, and we may look to capitalize on favorable market conditions to lock in long-term fixed-rate financing at attractive coupons across the currencies that support our assets to proactively manage future liabilities.
In terms of FFO per-share guidance, our forecast is largely unchanged from the preliminary outlook we previewed on the third-quarter call, although the year-over-year bar has been raised in the interim, given the outperformance in the fourth quarter.
At the midpoint, our 2021 guidance represents growth of approximately 4%, which includes near-term dilution from capital recycling.
In terms of the quarterly run rate, we expect the split between the first half of the year and the second half of the year to be approximately 49/51.

In other words, as you can see from the bridge chart on Page 13, we expect to dip down by about a $0.05 in the first quarter then to ramp up fairly steadily over the rest of the year.
In terms of the quarterly dividend, the distribution policy is ultimately a board-level decision.
Given the continued growth in our cash flows and taxable income, we would expect to see continued growth in the per-share dividend, just as we have each and every year since our IPO in 2004.
Last but certainly not least, let's turn to the balance sheet on Page 14.

During the fourth quarter, we continued to execute on our financial strategy of maximizing the menu of available capital options while minimizing the related costs and extending the duration of our liabilities to match our long-lived assets.
Fixed charge coverage reached 5.1 times, reflecting the results of our proactive liability management.
Net debt to adjusted EBITDA was slightly elevated at 6.1 times as of year end but is expected to come back down, in line with our long-term range over the course of the year through a combination of proceeds from asset sales and growth in cash flows as leases commenced from the record leasing activity in 2020.
In mid-October, we redeemed GBP 300 million of our 4.75% sterling bonds due in 2023.

We also redeemed $250 million of high-coupon series D preferred at five and seven-eighths.
In early January, we raised GBP 1 billion of 10.5-year green eurobonds at an all-time low coupon for Digital Realty of 0.625%.
We also retired $350 million of 2.75% bonds due in 2023, and we repaid all -- $530 million outstanding on the term loan due in 2023.
This successful execution against our financial strategy reflects the strength of our global platform, which provides the access to the full menu of public as well as private capital, sets us apart from our peers and enables us to prudently fund our growth.

As you can see from the chart on Page 14, we've extended our weighted average debt maturity out nearly seven years while ratcheting our weighted average coupon down to 2.3%.
A little over half our debt is euro-denominated, reflecting the growth of our global platform post Interxion and acting as a natural FX hedge for our investments outside the U.S. 90% of our debt is fixed rate to guard against a rising rate environment, and 98% of our debt is unsecured, providing the greatest flexibility for capital recycling.
Finally, as you can see from the left side of Page 14, we have a clear runway with nominal near-term debt maturities and no bar too tall in the out-years.

Our balance sheet is poised to weather a storm but also positioned to fuel growth opportunities for our customers around the globe, consistent with our long-term financing strategy.
This concludes our prepared remarks.
Now we will be pleased to take your questions.
Andrea, would you please begin the Q&A session?





