Speaker :: Katherine H. Antonello -- President, Chief Executive Officer And Director


Thank you, Lori, and thanks to everyone for joining us today.
On today's call, Mike and I will outline our financial results for the third quarter of 2021 and discuss our observations of the current workers' compensation market.
Despite the economic challenges presented by the pandemic, employers continues to perform well, and we are encouraged by the rebound we've experienced since May of 2021.
As businesses have reopened and restrictions have been lifted and our appetite has expanded, we've seen year-over-year increases in new business submissions, quotes and binds, and we once again closed the period with a record number of policies in force.

During the quarter, net written premiums increased 16% year-over-year, and our new business average policy size was up 15% over the same period.
In an effort to further diversify our risk exposure and capitalize on new market opportunities post COVID, we launched an appetite expansion initiative in July, and early indications are that the initiative is having a positive impact on new business.
More so than ever, we remain confident that new business opportunities and rising payrolls, driven by increases in both wages and employment, will bring further growth to our top line.
While our year-over-year new business premium for the first nine months of 2021 was limited by pandemic-related shutdowns in January and February, in total, the past two quarters were up 27% relative to 2020.
Gradual improvement in wages and employment contributed to the increase.

The policy retention rate on our renewal book remains very strong at 94% year-to-date, although this strength was offset to some degree by lower average policy sizes and modest rate decreases at renewal.
Overall, our year-over-year renewal premium was down 7% for the first nine months of 2021 and down 1% for the third quarter.
We continue to see declines in frequency for lost time claims and have maintained our current accident year loss and LAE ratio on voluntary business at 63.6%, down from 65.5% a year ago and 64.3% at year-end.
As part of our continued technology and process improvement initiatives, we implemented a new comprehensive claims system during the quarter, which we believe will enhance and streamline our claims handling.
In connection with this implementation, we undertook several process changes.
And as a result, we chose not to recognize any prior year loss reserve development during the quarter.
In line with our expectations, targeted expense savings and employee reductions and departures decreased third quarter expenses by a meaningful 19% year-over-year.

With that, Mike will now provide a further discussion of our financial results, and then I'll return to provide my closing remarks.
Mike?





Speaker :: Michael S. Paquette -- Chief Financial Officer Executive Vice President


Thank you, Kathy.
During the third quarter, we delivered a 3.8% annualized return on adjusted equity and a combined ratio of 98.1% within our largest operating segment, Employers.
For the quarter, our net premiums earned were $147 million, a 2% increase year-over-year.
While our written premiums for the first nine months were down 2%, our third quarter premium writings were up 16%, which demonstrates that small businesses are beginning to thrive and are actively shopping for workers' compensation coverage.
Also, in recognition of the positive shift we are experiencing in our final audit process, we increased our final audit accruals by just under $5 million during the quarter.
Our losses and loss adjustment expenses were $91 million, an increase of 18%.

As Kathy previously mentioned, we did not recognize any prior year loss reserve development on voluntary business during the current period, whereas we recognized $15 million of favorable loss reserve development a year ago.
Commission expenses were $20 million, an increase of 3%.
The increase was primarily the result of increased commissions on new business writings.
Underwriting and general and administrative expenses were $37 million, a decrease of 19% year-over-year.
The decrease resulted from targeted expense savings and employee reductions in departures, which reduced our fixed expenses such as compensation and professional fees as well as a reduction in bad debt expenses.
From a reporting segment perspective, our Employers segment had underwriting income of $3 million for the quarter versus $7 million a year ago, and its combined ratios were 98.1% and 95.2%, respectively.
Our Cerity segment had an underwriting loss of $3.3 million for the quarter, down from its underwriting loss of $3.9 million a year ago.

We are enthusiastic about Cerity's premium writings and have -- which have consistently increased over the past several months.
Turning to investments.
Our net investment income was $18 million for the quarter, consistent with that of the third quarter of last year.
Our average book yield was 3% at quarter end.
At quarter end, our fixed maturities had a duration of 3.5 and an average credit quality of A+, and our equity securities and other investments represented 13% of the total investment portfolio.
Our net income this quarter was favorably impacted by $1 million of net after-tax unrealized gains from equity securities and other investments, which are reflected on the income statement.
And our stockholders' equity and book value per share this quarter were each unfavorably impacted by $9 million of after-tax unrealized losses from fixed maturity securities, which are reflected on our balance sheet.
And finally, during the quarter, we repurchased $13.2 million of our common stock at an average price of $40.54 per share, and our remaining share repurchase authority currently stands at $36.7 million.

And with that, I'll turn the call back to Kathy.





Speaker :: Katherine H. Antonello -- President, Chief Executive Officer And Director


Thanks, Mike.
Leveraging our deep expertise in workers' compensation, we built and launched our own full stack direct-to-consumer insurtech known as Cerity.
We continue to view Cerity as a unique asset for employers, one that is positioned as an enabler to provide new and exciting solutions and experiences to our industry.
We believe that Cerity's technological and intellectual capabilities will support and enhance our future growth initiatives while providing direct access to workers' compensation insurance for businesses seeking an online experience.

For the remainder of the year, we'll be diligently focused on further improving our economies of scale by capitalizing on emerging labor market improvements, while continuing to maintain underwriting discipline and actively managing our expenses.
Our balance sheet and capital position are very strong and are highly supportive of these key initiatives.
As a specialist in small business workers' compensation, we are well positioned to react to the favorable trends we're seeing and remain confident in our continued success.

And with that, operator, we will now take questions.





