Speaker :: Martin McKenna -- Investor Relations


Good morning, and thanks for joining us to discuss Equity Residential's third quarter 2020 results.
Our featured speakers today are Mark Parrell, our President and CEO; and Michael Manelis, our Chief Operating Officer.
Bob Garechana, our Chief Financial Officer is with us as well for the Q&A.

Please be advised that, certain matters discussed during this conference call may constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the federal securities laws.
These forward-looking statements are subject to certain economic risks and uncertainties.
The company assumes no obligation to update or supplement these statements that become untrue because of subsequent events.

Now, I will turn the call over to Mark Parrell.





Speaker :: Mark Parrell -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Good morning, and thank you all for joining us today.
I will start by thanking my 2,700 Equity Residential colleagues across the country for all they have done this year to take care of our residents and run the business under often trying circumstances.
I appreciate your tireless work in meeting the needs of prospects and residents, in an environment that has been constantly changing.
Shifting to the business.
Our third quarter results reflect the challenges posed by the continuing health crisis and the impact it has had on living and working in the urban centers of our markets.
The approximately 23% of our portfolio located in Downtown San Francisco, Manhattan and Brooklyn and Downtown, Boston and Cambridge continue to be the most impacted.

When we last spoke with you in late July on our second quarter call, we were seeing demand in excess of 2019 levels and renewals that were at or near 2019 levels, albeit with significant rent reductions and concessions, leading to occupancy being generally stable.
As we went through August and early September, we continue to experience good demand, but turnover increased significantly pressuring occupancy.
The timing of these turnover increases PAUSE generally with the announcements by employers of delays in bringing employees back to offices, as well as incidence of civil unrest.
This occupancy pressure in turn caused further rent declines and increased concessions.

So far October has been broadly similar, though we have seen scattered positive signs in the form of modestly improved renewals and higher application volumes.
I caution, however, that market conditions remain too volatile and the timing of developments on mitigating the virus too unclear to suggest that we have turned a corner.
All that being said, we are heartened by the demand we see for our product, even in urban centers, where life has been significantly impacted by the pandemic.
We also see recent office leasing activity by technology firms, as well as activity by financial services office users as a long-term vote of confidence in our urban centers.

We believe that the knowledge-based economy will continue to drive growth in the U.S. and that our markets with their massive installed base of universities, innovative companies, venture capital firms, and the many other things that make a knowledge economy grow not to mention renowned entertainment and cultural amenities, will keep them at the center of this activity.
The cities in which we do business, and in which many of you live and work, will again be attractive places for affluent long-term renters to live work and play once the pandemic wanes.
The impact of the pandemic on increasing the ability of many office workers to remote work is certainly a fascinating new trend, whose long-term impact is difficult to gauge.
But no matter what it does to longer-term office demand, we feel that our relatively young demographic craves both work proximity and proximity to the entertainment and cultural amenities in our cities, which we think will remain very attractive to affluent renters once our cities reopen fully.

Also, supply in urban centers should in the midterm decline sharply, as developers, lenders and investors react to market conditions and construction costs that have not declined as of yet.
While we are not providing earnings guidance, we do want you to be aware that our financial results will weaken over subsequent quarters, as the full impact from the pandemic works its way through our rent roll.
Lower lease rates take some time to fully manifest themselves in our reported same-store revenue numbers, because at any one time our rent roll is made up of both new leases with lower rents and leases that were signed at higher rents prior to the beginning of the pandemic.

As the composition of our rent roll changes to include more of these lower rate leases our same-store revenue results decline.
The opposite is true on our way back up.
Occupancy change is causing much quicker shift in the trajectory of our reported revenue numbers.
In the meantime, the combination of our portfolio diversity and strong balance sheet will allow us to weather this challenging operating environment.
For EQR recovery is a matter of when, not if.

A quick note on collections.
We continue to have strong results.
We are collecting about 97% of our rents and resident payment behavior has not changed.
That said, we had increased residential bad debt costs in this quarter, reflecting the fact that although in the aggregate there's only a small number of residents who have stopped paying since the pandemic began.
We had a peak in July of those that reached our three-month non-payment threshold and their full balances were written off.
From that point forward, only a small number of new non-payers have surfaced, so while we will continue to deal with elevated bad debt and will likely not be to the same extent seen in our third quarter numbers.
On a similar note, the write-off of non-residential straight-line rent amounts in the quarter was large and lumpy and should not reoccur going forward.

My final comment will be on investment activity.
We closed on one acquisition in the quarter 158 unit property in suburban Seattle, and easy commuting distance for the growing job center of Bellevue.
The purchase price was $48.9 million.
The property is a brand-new asset in lease-up, and we expect a year two cap rate upon completion of the lease-up to be 4.7%.
This is the only asset that we have purchased this year versus approximately $750 million in 2020 property sales.
And this purchase is a continuation our strategy of buying urban and suburban properties, with affluent well-employed residents, the acquisition of which we believe will lead to attractive long-term cash flow and unlevered IRR growth.
We will continue to buy properties using proceeds from selling assets and we think have weaker prospects, due to property condition or location or where the buyer is willing to pay a price that exceeds our estimate of fair value.

I will now turn the call over to Michael Manelis, our Chief Operating Officer to walk you through the markets in detail and then we'll take your questions.
Michael?





Speaker :: Michael Manelis -- Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer


Thanks Mark.
Let me start by thanking our employees for their dedication and hard work during the third quarter.
This has been a year like no other and their commitment to their residents, their colleagues has been tremendous.
The third quarter saw better overall demand for our apartments both urban and suburban.
Suburban assets are holding up relatively well while our urban assets are producing higher turnover leading to decreased rental rates, increased use of concessions, and lower occupancy.
Overall, this quarter's performance was determined as much by the density of the location urban or suburban as by the market.
As we previously discussed, a little over half of our portfolio is urban, while the remainder is suburban.
On a positive note, the improvement in demand across all locations resulted in a 5% increase in year-over-year movements.
Resident turnover, however, was a more challenging story.
After eight consecutive quarters of improving resident turnover, the third quarter of 2020 was the first quarter where the number of residents moving out increased on a year-over-year basis.

Resident turnover continued to decline in the suburban markets, but the increased turnover in the urban markets more than offset this improvement.
On the renewal side, as we sit here today, we are renewing just over 50% of our residents with approximately 35% of our fourth quarter renewal offers being issued with some renewal increase mostly in the suburban submarkets.
Portfoliowide occupancy is currently running just above 94%.
The suburban portfolio is around 96% with the urban portfolio slightly below 93%.
As I mentioned, the good news is that we continue to see more people looking for our apartments than last year.
As disclosed in the release, applications at the company level were up 20% over last year in the quarter, driven by outsized growth in the urban core and this growth accelerated in October, define normal seasonal slowing.
Given the amount of inventory we have available to sell in our urban portfolio, we will need to maintain this velocity through the fourth quarter or reduce turnover in order to continue to hold portfoliowide occupancy at 94%.

A stabilization and an improvement of our occupancy is what would allow us to dial back concessions and begin increasing rates.
Much like applications, turnover, and occupancy, the pricing story is also bifurcated between urban and suburban.
In the urban markets, pricing continued to trend down and concession usage increased throughout the quarter.
70% of the portfoliowide concessions used during the quarter were in Manhattan, Brooklyn, Boston and Cambridge, and Downtown San Francisco.
The volume of new leases is strong in these submarkets, however, price prospects continued to be very price-sensitive.
Previous addresses provided on applications suggest that the large majority of these new residents are deal seekers who are moving to us from within the same market.
In the suburban markets, concession use was rare and pricing was fairly stable throughout the quarter with a few submarkets beginning to show modest year-over-year growth particularly in Southern California.

Now, let me move on to some market-specific commentary.
Starting with Boston, elevated vacancy levels at existing properties and the inopportune recent delivery of new supply in the city will continue to challenge Boston's near-term performance.
While concession use remains elevated in the city in Cambridge it has been consistent since July with about four to six weeks being the norm.
Leasing activity is predominantly coming from intra-city moves with the lack of international students and workers continuing to pressure rates.
Currently, we have seen some very early signs of stability with no incremental declines in rates for the last several weeks and marginal improvement in occupancy.
Boston is typically highly seasonal and these albeit early signs are bucking that typical trend.
For the market to fully stabilize, it will require continued improvement in the demand drivers to aid and absorption of the new supply that is being delivered currently and anticipated in 2021.
New York continues to be one of the markets' hardest hit by the pandemic and we still see residents leaving the city to wait it out.

During the quarter, leasing activity was driven by deal seekers or intra-city moves who represented approximately 75% of total move-ins.
This is up 15% points over last year.
Meanwhile, the elevated move-outs continued with most of our residents moving to the surrounding states with suburban New Jersey capturing the largest share.
In our conversations with New York-based employers and based on Mark and My's recent visit to New York, you can see early signs of the city trying to reenergize.
While overall activity in the city remains meaningfully suppressed, there are absolutely a few areas where things are starting to feel a little better, specifically the Upper West and East side submarkets.
Other submarkets notably Midtown, Chelsea, SoHo, and the financial district have a long way to go.
Overall, we've noticed a brief period of stability beginning in late September and through October which is far better than the weekly sequential declines we experienced throughout the entire second quarter and much of the third.

Currently, we are defining the usual seasonal drop-off in applications and are achieving outsized growth in weekly application counts.
We have also recently seen a slowing in the pace of move-outs.
However, we will continue to feel pressure on occupancy until move-outs fully normalize.
Our occupancy in the market is just below 90%.
Studio apartments which were once our highest occupied unit type prior to the pandemic are now our lowest at 88%.
We are getting ready to furnish a few of these as many offices available for our residents who are working from home and we're going to test the demand for renting these spaces in hourly blocks of time.
The good news is that New York is resilient and we strongly believe that it will remain a top destination for highly educated workers.
We hear anecdotally from our local teams that residents intend to return when we get to the other side of this pandemic.
Declines in rates have made living in Manhattan more affordable and that could be a catalyst to bringing people back.
The broader recovery in this market will be fueled by a lack of competitive new supply and the continued growth of big tech employers in this market.

Many of these tech firms continue to expand their investments in this market, even during the pandemic, supporting the view that the city will continue to thrive as it has in the past post pandemic.
Moving to D.C., which is holding up better than our other East Coast markets, but performance during the quarter moderated due to slowing Class A multifamily absorption.
The market benefits from federal government employment, which has actually seen a net increase over the last 12 months, but the overall job growth has declined.
The ability of our residents to pivot to work from home has allowed us to maintain occupancy with concession use that was relatively low in the quarter.
We are seeing some increase in concession use and pricing pressure in this market and expect performance to moderate through the fourth quarter, partly due to normal seasonality, but also due to the continued competitive pressure from new supply.
Heading over to the West Coast.

Seattle began the year with strong expectations based on elevated job growth and a favorable competitive supply landscape in the downtown area for the second consecutive year.
In addition, Seattle's median income within the city limits increased by 10% and crossed the $100,000 a year threshold, which makes it the third major city to do so.
While Seattle was initially impacted in March by COVID, its performance through late July was very stable.
Social unrest in the city and extended work from home announcements in late July and August, however, began impacting our performance, especially our ability to retain residents in the CBD Belltown and Capitol Hill submarket.
Overall, market occupancy is now just below 95%, with elevated turnover during the quarter that was heavily concentrated in the Capitol Hill and CBD Belltown submarkets.
Concessions, which were hardly used previously, are now starting to be seen in stabilized assets, mostly in these submarkets.
Eastside properties are also using concessions, but with a lower frequency and properties to the north continue to be in the best overall shape with good year-over-year growth in the Bothell Mill Creek submarket.
Overall, housing prices continue to rise at a fast pace.

And along with the other factors just discussed, we would expect this market to quickly bounce back post pandemic.
San Francisco is our most challenged market, although it is not the same everywhere.
Overall, occupancy is now below 93%, while our downtown assets are 87%, East Bay is 96%, and both Peninsula and South Bay are currently at 94%.
Since mid-March, the downtown portfolio has been pressured on rate with escalating concession use.
Concessions at two months are now common downtown and what used to be a 15% to 20% rent premium between Downtown San Francisco and new supply in Downtown, Oakland is now flat to a 5% discount.
As we think about the future, San Francisco should recover when there is more clarity on tech company's long-term plans regarding office versus work-from-home policies, and an improved quality of life in the downtown area.
Supply in 2021 will continue to be concentrated in Oakland and the South Bay.
South Bay supply may challenge operations even further, unless the tech workers resume living in closer proximity to their offices.

One small positive from the declines in rental rate is that, it has made the city of San Francisco, a more affordable place to live, potentially attracting more people back into the city.
During October, we saw outsized growth in applications and a slight improvement in renewals.
This, in turn, led to slower declines in pricing in our downtown portfolio.
In Los Angeles, the urban portfolio maintained occupancy around 95% through the quarter, while contending with continued pressure from new supply in the Downtown, Koreatown Mid-Wilshire Corridor.
West L.A. continues to feel pressure from the slow restart of online content creation.
Overall, pricing including the use of concessions has been stable since mid-September, while the application activity has continued to grow.
The suburban portfolio continues to show signs of improvement with occupancy staying at or near 97%.
The suburban submarkets of Inland Empire Santa Clarita Valley and Ventura County are all experiencing modest year-over-year gains in rental income.
That being said, we expect the overall portfolio to modestly improve through the quarter, primarily driven by continued rate improvement in the suburban submarkets.

It is only fitting that I conclude our market updates with Orange County and San Diego, which stand out for their resilience through the pandemic.
While our portfolio in these markets consist primarily of suburban assets, and were certainly impacted by the pandemic, they have consistently sustained occupancy above 96.5% collectively, while also improving the percent of residents renewing their leases.
Both markets have year-over-year revenue gains and are expected to sustain or strengthen their performance through the fourth quarter.
Overall, we haven't seen anything that leads us to believe, that the trends just discussed are likely to change meaningfully in the near term.
The suburban portfolio should continue to outperform with some potential improvement in pricing and relatively stable occupancy.
The urban markets will likely continue to be challenged, particularly Manhattan Brooklyn, City of Boston and Cambridge and Downtown San Francisco, where continued pressure from the increased turnover and a highly concessionary operating environment impact performance.
As detailed in the release and in my remarks, we have seen tentative signs of improvement in some of the metrics in these markets, but pricing remains under significant pressure.

We will need to see occupancy begin to improve and pricing to stabilize to feel like we have turned a corner.
Our urban properties in Washington D.C., Seattle and L.A. will likely continue to see slight moderation in both rate and occupancy, with potentially more pressure in Seattle, where some signs of weakness have come into play of late.
While the economic uncertainty and the extended impact from the pandemic have made it difficult to predict what a recovery looks like and when it may occur, we remain optimistic on a number of fronts including the ability to grow rate in our suburban portfolios, continued demand for our product regardless of location and solid collection performance.
Our ongoing efforts will continue to seek out those opportunities to improve performance while ensuring the well-being of our employees and residents.

Thank you.
At this time I will turn the call back over to the operator to begin the Q&A session.





