Speaker :: Michael J. Schall -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Welcome to our fourth quarter earnings conference call.
I'm very pleased to acknowledge the promotions of Angela Kleiman and Barb Pak to their new roles at Essex, and greatly appreciate their contributions for many years of dedicated service.
Both Angela and Barb, will follow me with prepared remarks; and Adam Berry, our Chief Investment Officer is here for Q&A.

At the end of last year, we announced John Burkart's retirement and we thank John for his tireless efforts and numerous contributions to the Company's success over nearly three decades.

As we reported last night, our fourth quarter and full-year 2020 results continue to be significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, resulting in lower same-property revenue and core FFO per share, for both the quarter and the full-year.
Similar to the last few quarters, pandemic-related regulations have had two primary consequences.
First, shelter-in-place and related orders have resulted in unprecedented job losses and; second, anti-eviction and related laws prevent us from maximizing property performance.

Government mandates are constantly changing and they intensified during the fourth quarter, given -- surge in COVID-19 cases.
Navigating the pandemic involves extraordinary efforts and thank the Essex team for their tireless dedication amid these challenges.

Overall, our fourth quarter results reflect stability and sequential net effective rents beginning in October.
And as discussed during our third quarter earnings call.
Sequential revenues improved 30 basis points in the quarter, with market rents mostly flat in the cities and modestly positive in suburban locations.
Therefore, we are cautiously optimistic that we have or will soon reach the bottom in market rent declines.

As of December 2000, preliminary three month trailing job losses in the Essex markets were -- 7.9% year-over-year, a 150 basis point improvement compared to minus 9.4% for September 2000, and outperforming the nation, which had a 100 basis point improvement from September to -- December.
Even with the recovery of jobs in Q3 and Q4, the nation had 9.2 million fewer jobs year-over-year for the month of December, roughly equal to the number of jobs lost at the worst point of the financial crisis.

Our data analytics team prepared S-17 of the supplemental, which is our base case scenario underlying our expectation that net effective rents will declined 1.9% in 2021.
The range of potential outcomes is extraordinarily wide for 2021, given many unknowns that relate to the pandemic, including the pace of vaccine deployment and changes in regulation.
Our modeling further assumes 4% GDP growth, which should lead to positive momentum in the second half of 2021.

Apartment supply will continue to be a challenge, especially in the downtown locations of Los Angeles and Seattle.
Our data and [Phonetic] analytics team expects approximately 34,000 apartment deliveries in 2021, a modest increase compared to last year.
Also similar to 2020, we don't expect much for sale housing production going forward.
It's our experience at affordable for sale housing competes directly with rentals, once brands rise to a level that approximates the monthly payment of an entry-level for sale home, and there is little risk about occurring in the Essex markets any time soon.

Page S-17.1 of the supplemental highlights 13 of recent multibillion dollar tech initial public offerings for companies headquartered in the Essex markets.
Overall 2020 was a great year for IPOs, with a 147 tech sector offerings completed during the year, it's our view that the IPO market is essential to recharge the tech ecosystem, providing growth capital to early stage investors and to generate liquidity for reinvestment.

Page S-17.1 also illustrates reacceleration in job openings for the Top 10 tech companies, which has increased 38% since the August trough.
Our analysis indicates that nearly 60% of the total job postings are located in California or Washington, with the next largest state Texas accounting for just 7%.

Page S-17.2 of the supplemental package demonstrates a venture capital investments continued on a record pace in 2020 with approximately $130 billion invested in the US, with the Essex markets continuing to receive the dominant share of these [Phonetic] investment.
Success in the knowledge-based economy requires a critical mass of highly skilled workers, creating a network effect that draws companies to the Bay Area -- Seattle, while only a limited number of venture-backed companies will go public, some will experience extraordinarily -- extraordinary growth similar to Snowflake, DoorDash, Airbnb and resulting in thousands of high paying jobs.

The environment today has many similarities to the previous recessionary periods, including the financial crisis and the bursting of the.com bubble, in both cases migration out of California was often front page news.

In 2020, we experienced higher outmigration than normal, especially in our West Coast urban centers.
In our experience, people make different housing choices during recessions and is not surprising to see many in the large baby boomer cohort, monetize the value of an expensive California home to move to less expensive areas, as part of a retirement plan.
This recession is unique with respect to the extraordinary loss of jobs -- that involve lower-paid service workers, jobs that are concentrated in the city centers, and effective employees often had only two choices, move immediately to find work or stay in their home shielded by eviction forbearance laws.

As with previous recessions, we expect most of these trends to reverse.
We expect that the demand for restaurant services and travel will recover swiftly, as vaccines are administered, bringing back related service jobs.
Workers in the Essex markets earn more than in most parts of the country, and the draw of higher paying jobs combined with lower recent rent levels makes rental housing down the West Coast, the most affordable it has been since 2013.

A recent McKinsey study estimates that only 22% of the American workforce can work-from-home without any productivity loss.
We have been tracking many companies that -- have adopted work-from-home models during the pandemic, and we remain confident that the vast majority of companies will ask employees to return to the office when it is safe to do so, likely with increased work-from-home flexibility going forward.
Google, Netflix and Apple are among the largest companies to have expressed a desire to return to the office.
Many others will follow.

Turning to the regulatory environment.
A third-wave of COVID-19 cases beginning in November, and related concerns about hospital availability led to the imposition of severe stay-at-home orders in all of our California markets, some of these restrictions were eased last week, but all of the Essex markets remain in California's most restrictive category.

Recently with the passage of SB 91 last week, the State of California has extended COVID-19 related infection, protection from January 31 to June 30, 2021 including pushing back the requirement to pay at least 25% a pandemic -- related rent.
In addition, the law established a State Rental Assistance Program to allocate $2.6 billion in federal stimulus funds using income levels to prioritize payments and accepting related to applications in March.
As with similar laws, there are many related requirements and complexities, which we are evaluating.

Turning to the apartment investment markets.
During 2020, we sold four properties with a total of 670 apartment homes for $343 million, all of which were placed under contract subsequent to the implementation of shelter-in-place orders in March.
Given the wide discount in valuation for public REITs compared to the private real estate markets, property sales remain our preferred source of funds for investment.
Since the onset of the pandemic, a relatively small number of apartment sales support our belief that property values have not changed materially since the onset of the pandemic.

However, extraordinary changes in rent, rent increasing in the case of both suburban markets and decreasing sharply in some urban locations, makes it difficult to draw conclusions about cap rates.
In the suburbs, where rents are generally at or above pre-pandemic levels, property values have modestly increased and cap rates are somewhat lower compared to the pre-pandemic period.
Given lower rents and significant concessions in hard hit cities, recent price talk around possible sales indicate about 5% reduction in value versus the pre-COVID period, resulting in cap rates for high quality properties below 4%.

As with previous recessions, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have continued to provide very attractive financing with seven-year fixed rate financing in the mid-2% range, potentially supporting lower cap rates.
Vaccine distribution should remove uncertainty with respect to apartment operations and property values, as a result, we believe transaction volumes will begin to accelerate.
As we've indicated before, improved cash flow from positive leverage in apartments has historically led to a robust transaction market.

With that, I'll turn the call over to Angela.





Speaker :: Angela L. Kleiman -- Senior Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer


Thank you, Mike.
First, I would like to express my appreciation to the Essex operations team for their diligent efforts to serve our customers amid a challenging environment caused by the COVID pandemic.
Thank you for all your hard work.

As for my comments, I will begin by discussing our 2020 results, followed by our outlook for 2021.
Overall, our market performed, as we expected, despite the headwinds of new COVID-related closures and seasonal decline in demand.
Currently the urban core, particularly in tech-centric markets continue to remain more impacted by COVID-19 related job losses and office [Technical Issues].

In addition, the change in quality of life, resulting from the closures of restaurants and public amenities has driven a temporary shift in consumer preferences.
High-rise buildings or communities located in areas with high walk scores have been the most impacted by this shift in demand.
Conversely, communities with private outdoor space or more affordable residences outside urban cores continue to experience greater demand, which benefited many of our properties in Ventura, San Diego, Orange County and East Bay in Northern California.
This temporary shift in demand continued in the fourth quarter, where we experienced 7.6% and 9.9% year-over-year increase in quarterly turnover in CBD Seattle and San Francisco compared to the portfolio average turnover of only 1.3%.
Furthermore, our CBD locations also had a greater concentration -- apartment supply deliveries, typically accompanied by very high concession levels.

During the fourth quarter, we continued our leasing strategy of leveraging concessions on stabilized communities and building occupancy.
There has been encouraging indicators from a sequential perspective, in that, more than half of our same property portfolio grew revenue sequentially, driven in part by increases in occupancy and decreases in concessions.
We have provided year-over-year net effective rent changes for our portfolio on Page S-17 of our supplemental.

New lease rates were down 8.9% in the fourth quarter, stable in January, and an improvement from the negative 12.2% achieved in the third quarter.
Concessions on same property pool improved from approximately $18 million in the third quarter to $13 million fourth quarter.
This reduction in concessions is noteworthy, considering the fourth quarter has seasonally lower demand and historically concessions increased during this period, rather than decrease.

Key highlights of the same-property performance of our major markets in the fourth quarter are as follows.
In Seattle, 4.9% year-over-year revenue decline was primarily driven by Seattle CBD, which declined by 13%, while the remaining submarkets average [Indecipherable decline.
Year-over-year job growth in Seattle, declined by 7.3% in the fourth quarter.
In Northern California, the 10.4% year-over-year revenue decline was led by CVD, San Francisco and Oakland, averaging an 18% decline, contrast that with a 4.2% decline in Contra Costa County, while Santa Clara County performed in line with the regional average of a 10% decline.
Year-over-year job growth in Northern California declined by 8%, but San Jose sale further at a 6.4% decline.

In Southern California, 7.2% year-over-year decline was primarily driven by LA, CBD and West LA submarkets, averaging a 17% decline, offset by an average decline of 2.4% in our suburban markets of Ventura Orange County, and San Diego.
Fourth quarter year-over-year job growth in Southern California declined by 8%.

Moving on to our 2021 outlook.
As indicated on S-17 of the supplemental, multifamily supply as a percentage of stock remain low at 0.9% for our portfolio.
While we expect the percentage of the year-over-year growth to remain flat.
New completions will once again be concentrated in the CBD's in urban submarkets, where supply is projected to increase by 2.1% compared to just 0.7% across the rest of the portfolio.
The confluence of minimal supply and extraordinary job losses we [Technical Issues] a significant headwind in our urban markets.

In Seattle, we expect multifamily supply as percentage of stock to increase in 2021 by 1.6%, driven by 2.9% in the CBD, offset by a 1% increase in the suburbs where we have the majority of our units.
We have also seen positive office activities by major tech companies as they continue to push forward on expansion projects.
In Seattle Amazon received approval for a 1.1 million square foot project.
In Bellevue Microsoft has continued with their campus expansion.
And in Kirkland, Google acquired a 10-acre site for a large campus.
In Northern California, we project overall multifamily supply as a percentage of stock in 2021 to decrease by 10 basis points although Oakland and San Jose CBD are expected to increase by 1.8% and 3% respectively.
Despite the impact of COVID tech expansion plans have continued in the Bay Area.
Amazon purchased a 6-acre site near downtown San Francisco.
Facebook last month submitted an updated plan for its 1.25 million square foot campus expansion in Menlo Park and Google continue to work with the City of San Jose for its major new campus at Diridon Station.
In addition, the biotech sector continue to be a strong source of office demand highlighted by the recently approved expansion of Genentech's headquarter in South San Francisco which would add up to 4.3 million square foot of new office space.
In Southern California, we project overall multifamily supply as a percentage of stock to remain flat.
The most notable increase is 4% LA CBD and deliveries in West LA will remain elevated once again this year.

While many uncertainties remain as to legislation and the timing of the vaccine based on current market conditions, we assumed our scheduled rent for the same property portfolio will trough in the second quarter of this year.
Because leases are typically one year in duration, our year-over-year revenue growth will be negative in the first half and positive in the second half, leading to our same-store full year guidance of 2.5% of revenue decline at the midpoint.
Lastly, our current same-store physical occupancy is 96.4%.
Our availability 30 day out is 4.7%.

Thank you.
And I will now turn the call to Barb Pak.





Speaker :: Barb M. Pak -- Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer


Thank you, Angela.
I'll start with a few comments on our fourth quarter results followed by key assumptions in our 2021 guidance and finally an update on our recent capital markets activities and the balance sheet.
As expected, the fourth quarter was a challenging period with core FFO declining 12.5% compared to one year ago.
This was primarily driven by an 8% decline in same property revenues as a result of higher concessions and delinquencies.
As we noted last quarter we report concessions on a cash basis in our same property results because we believe this is more indicative of true market conditions.
However, we are required by GAAP to treat concessions on a straight-line basis in calculating consolidated revenue and FFO.

As Angelo mentioned during the fourth quarter, we provided 5 billion fewer concessions than the third quarter, which helped improve same property revenue sequentially.
However, core FFO declined by 4% or $0.13 per share compared to the third quarter of which $0.16 is attributable to lower straight-line rent concessions.
We expect this line item to continue to be a headwind to core FFO growth in 2021, which I will discuss in a minute.
Please note on Page S8 of the supplemental we have detailed the quarterly impact of non-cash straight-line rents.

Turning to delinquencies.
We continue to take a conservative approach to reserving against uncollected rents, especially given the surge in COVID-19 cases in the fourth quarter, which resulted in extended lockdowns in our markets throughout much of the quarter.
As such we reserved against the entire net delinquency balance during the fourth quarter.
Our receivable balance currently stands at approximately $7 million including joint ventures at pro rata share.
Based on past collections we feel this receivable balance is consistent with our ongoing conservative approach.
We will continue to assess our delinquency reserve and our net receivable balance each quarter based on collection history and market conditions.

Turning to our 2021 guidance.
Key assumptions are available on Page 5 of the earnings release and S14 of the supplemental.
We've provided a wider than normal range for same-property revenues and core FFO given the significant uncertainties that remain surrounding COVID and the recovery ahead, including vaccine distribution and eviction moratoriums that are outside our control but could swing guidance in a variety of ways.
That said, we felt it was important to outline our key assumptions based on information we have today.

For the full year, we expect core FFO per diluted share to decline by 5.1% at the midpoint.
The key drivers of the decrease are primarily related to the following two items.
First, we expect same-property revenues and NOI to decline by 2.5% and 4.6% respectively at the midpoint.
While our current operating fundamentals remain steady in our markets as compared to several months ago, we will continue to feel the negative effects of the 2020 rent declines throughout most of 2021.
In addition, due to the eviction moratoriums and regulations that remain outside our control, we expect delinquencies will remain elevated in 2021 and will be a drag to core FFO by an estimated $0.45 per share at the midpoint.
The Company has a long history of excellent rent collections and we expect that this temporary delinquency headwind to become a tailwind to FFO growth once the various COVID related restrictions are lifted.

Second, we also face significant headwinds from straight line concessions.
We expect this noncash item will result in $0.41 to $0.56 per share decline in core FFO representing about a 4% reduction in growth on a year-over-year basis.
As it relates to concessions, we expect they will remain high in the first half of the year before moderating in the second half of the year as the economic recovery takes hold.
As such, we expect the impact from straight line rent concessions to be minimal in the first half of the year with most of the negative impact we forecasted to fall in the last two quarters of 2021.

Lastly, on to capital markets activities and the balance sheet.
During the fourth quarter, we closed $206 million of new preferred equity investments and bought back $46 million of common stock at a significant discount to NAV.
These investments are being funded with three asset sales totaling approximately $275 million that are under contract and expected to close in the first quarter.
This is consistent with our guiding principles of match funding investments on a leverage neutral basis.

For the year, we were able to arbitrage the difference between public and private market pricing by selling $343 million of assets at prices generally consistent with pre-COVID levels and buying back $269 million of stock at an average price of $225 per share, all while maintaining our balance sheet strength and creating value for our shareholders.
Our balance sheet remains strong with minimal near-term funding needs and sound financial metrics.
While our net debt to EBITDA has increased this year this is primarily the result of the significant decline in EBITDA caused by the pandemic.
As the economic recovery takes hold and the West Coast economies continue to reopen, we expect our net debt to EBITDA ratio will improve.
With ample liquidity and a well covered dividend, our balance sheet remains a source of strength.

With that, I'll turn the call back to the operator for questions.





