Speaker :: Adam Wudel -- Senior Vice President of Finance, Capital Markets and Treasurer


Thank you, Valerie, and good morning.
I am joined today by Summit Hotel Properties' President and Chief Executive Officer, Jon Stanner; and Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Trey Conkling.

Please note that many of our comments today are considered forward-looking statements as defined by federal securities laws.
These statements are subject to risks and uncertainties, both known and unknown as described in our SEC filings.
Forward-looking statements that we make today are effective only as of today, August 4, 2021, and we undertake no duty to update them later.
You can find copies of our SEC filings and earnings release, which contain reconciliations to non-GAAP financial measures referenced on this call, on our website at www.
shpreit.com.
Please welcome Summit Hotel Properties' President and Chief Executive Officer, Jon Stanner.





Speaker :: Jonathan P. Stanner -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Adam, and thank you all for joining us today for our second quarter 2021 earnings conference call.
Overall, we are extremely pleased with the acceleration of our operating trends in the second quarter, which significantly exceeded our initial expectations and represented a nearly 50% increase in RevPAR from the first quarter.
Occupancy average daily rate and overall profitability all reached new highs since the onset of the pandemic.
And importantly, we achieved positive corporate cash flow for the quarter.
Demand improved sequentially each month during the quarter and we sold 30% more room nights in the second quarter than we did in the first quarter, while leisure demand continues to be the primary driver of our operating results.
We are also encouraged by improving corporate transient demand trends that are having a positive effect on our hotels located in urban locations and our mid-week performance, in particular.
Demand in our urban hotels grew at a considerably faster pace than the overall portfolio during the second quarter, increasing 43% over the first quarter.

For the second quarter, we reported pro forma RevPAR of $78, which was over 3 times higher than our second quarter RevPAR last year and a 49% increase over last quarter.
Like demand, RevPAR improved sequentially each month of the quarter and our preliminary results for July show further RevPAR acceleration to just over $100, a robust 15% improvement over June, and our first full month of RevPAR above $100 since the pandemic started.
RevPAR for the second quarter was 43% lower than what was achieved in the second quarter of 2019, a significant improvement from the first quarter when RevPAR was nearly 60% lower than the comparable 2019 period.
This gap narrowed considerably in July with RevPAR only 21% below July 2019 levels, which we expect will be sufficient to drive corporate cash flow positive on a year-to-date basis.

Importantly, the recovery of average rates accelerated meaningfully during the quarter as ADR across our portfolio increased 15% compared to the first quarter, as both weekend and weekday ADR grew double digits.
Average rates in our urban portfolio increased 23% from the first quarter, which encouragingly reflects some level of rate accretive remixing of our business with corporate travel.
Weekend occupancy was an impressive 79% during the second quarter and was over 80% in both May and June.
Midweek occupancy also continues to steadily improve and the gap between weekday and weekend occupancy continues to narrow.
Midweek occupancy in July was 67%, a full percentage points higher than it was just 60 days ago.

As you would expect, we are closely monitoring the developments of the spread of the Delta variant of COVID-19 and have positioned the company very well, if we begin to see any reversal in the strong reopening momentum we've experienced over the past few months.
Thankfully, to date, we have not seen any negative response to the variant in our July operating numbers and our pace for future months remains decidedly positive.
August pace is up slightly to what we had on the books for July at this time last month, but with rates nearly 5% higher.
September pace is up 6% over August and October pace is over 25% higher than September.
While we would not preclude some plateauing of results in the back half of August and into September when we get into a naturally slower leisure demand period, we remain optimistic that some of that leisure business will be replaced by pent-up corporate demand in the post Labor Day period, particularly as we get into October and pass the Jewish holiday season.
Trey will provide some additional color on our operating results later in the call.

During the second quarter, we completed the contribution of six wholly owned hotels, totaling 846 guestrooms and our joint venture with GIC for $172 million.
The transaction generated approximately $84 million of cash proceeds, which increased our investment capacity, reduced corporate leverage, and enhanced our overall liquidity.
Subsequent to quarter end, a portion of the net cash proceeds from the asset contribution were reinvested into the acquisition of the newly built 110 guestrooms Residence Inn Steamboat Springs for $33 million, which further scales our joint venture with GIC.
The extended stay hotel is expected to benefit from favorable market demand trends and is a perfect complement to our existing portfolio of well-located, high quality hotels with efficient operating models.
As the newest hotel in Steamboat Springs, one of only six other hotels that have opened in that market since the year 2000, and the first Marriott branded extended stay product in the market.
The hotel has been able to achieve a 30% RevPAR premium compared to its competitive set in the first six months of operation.
And just over three weeks of our ownership, the hotel has been one of our best performers, running over 93% occupancy with RevPAR of over $180.
Our 2021 forecast for the hotel is already ahead of our underwriting, reflecting just how quickly the fundamental operating backdrop has improved.
Our joint venture now holds 12 assets with a total investment of nearly $500 million and affirms the commitment from both parties to find unique and opportunistic investments to continue to grow the partnership.

During the second quarter, we invested approximately $2.9 million in our portfolio and items primarily related to planned maintenance capital.
As we mentioned last quarter, given our conviction around the long-term improvement in demand trends, we plan to accelerate several renovations into the second half of 2021, which will take advantage of the still lower than historical occupancies to minimize disruption from those projects.
We expect to spend between $30 million to $40 million in capital expenditures for the year on a consolidated basis and between $25 million and $35 million on a pro rata basis.

With that, I'd like to publicly welcome and turn the call over to our new CFO, Trey Conkling.





Speaker :: William H. Conkling -- Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer


Thanks, Jon, and good morning, everyone.
During the second quarter, our resort hotels continued to lead the recovery with occupancy levels that exceeded 83% and a RevPAR of nearly $110.
Resort occupancy remained strong across the quarter with each month achieving 80% or better, driven by continued growth in leisure demand and overall robust summer travel.

For July 2021, preliminary occupancy, ADR and RevPAR of our comparable resort portfolio, which excludes the Residence Inn Steamboat exceeded second quarter 2019 levels.
Moving onto our 42 non-urban hotels, this subset of the portfolio achieved better than 75% occupancy and an $89 RevPAR during the second quarter, with June metrics improving substantially to 78% occupancy and a $99 RevPAR on the strength of weekend demand.
Consistent with our resort portfolio, preliminary July numbers for our non-urban portfolio demonstrated steady improvement with a 79% occupancy and a $108 RevPAR, representing month-over-month growth of approximately 9% compared to June.
Finally, while urban hotels continue to lag the broader sector recovery, our 30 urban assets have also benefited from strong summer travel, with second quarter RevPAR increasing sequentially 75% compared to the first quarter.
This was driven by strong weekend travel with occupancies averaging over 70%.
The outlook for our 30 urban hotels continues to improve as preliminary July RevPAR is anticipated to exceed $94, representing month-over-month growth of 23% compared to June.

Although booking windows remain very short term in nature and forecasting continues to be a challenge, we have experienced a decline in the percentage of room nights booked near to or on the night of stay.
for example, transient room nights booked within three days of stay declined from 46% in April to 39% in June, and nights booked in the week, for the week, declined from 60% to 53% over that same time period.
While this represents a very short booking window relative to pre-pandemic standards, we view this as another encouraging trend reflecting an improving environment.

From a cash flow perspective, the continued growth in demand combined with thoughtful expense management enabled Summit to generate positive corporate cash flow for the second quarter.
Pro forma hotel EBITDA was $25.3 million for the second quarter, which is more than three times higher than the hotel EBITDA we reported in the first quarter of 2021.
Operating cost per occupied room declined over 20% compared to 2019, which drove second quarter gross operating profit margin and hotel EBITDA margin to an impressive 45% and 29%, respectively.

We continue to operate our hotels utilizing a very lean staffing model, which consists of approximately 17 FTEs on average or less than 50% of pre-pandemic staffing levels.
Rehiring hourly staff, particularly in the housekeeping department has been an ongoing issue across the industry.
Despite these challenges and a primarily occupancy driven topline growth, our asset management team has done a great job controlling operating expenses, leading to strong hotel EBITDA retention of 46% when compared to the second quarter of 2019.

Lastly, turning to the balance sheet and liquidity.
We currently have over $430 million of pro rata total liquidity, which includes nearly $42 million of unrestricted cash on hand.
Today, our weighted average interest rate is approximately 3.4%.
We have no debt maturities until November of 2022 and we maintain ample with current liquidity to repay all maturing debt through 2023.

With that, I will turn the call back over to Jon.





Speaker :: Jonathan P. Stanner -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Trey.
In closing, we continue to gain enthusiasm on the recovery of our business and the outlook for Summit in particular.
We remain confident in our business model and optimistic on the overall recovery in general.
And with that, we'll open the call to your questions.





