Speaker :: Glenn Klevitz -- Vice President, Treasurer and Investor Relations


Thank you, Eric.
Good evening, everyone, and welcome to the World Fuel Service's third quarter Twenty twenty earnings conference call.
I'm Glen Clevis and I'll be doing the introductions on this evening's call alongside our live slide presentation.
This call is also available via webcast to access this webcast or feature webcasts, please visit the World Puel Services website and click on the webcast icon.
With us on the call today are Michael Castlebar, chairman and chief executive officer, and IRA Burns, executive vice president and chief financial officer.
By now, you should have all received a copy of our earnings release, if not, you can access the release on our website.
Before we get started, I would like to review World Fuel Safe Harbor Statement.
Certain statements made today, including comments about world fuels, expectations regarding future plans and performance, are forward looking statements that are subject to a range of uncertainties and risks that could cause world fuels.
Actual results to materially differ from the forward looking information.

A description of these factors that could cause results to materially differ from these projections can be found in world fuel, its most recent form 10K and other reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission.
World fuel assumes no obligation to revise or publicly released the results of any revisions to these forward looking statements in light of new information or future events.
This presentation also includes certain financial measures as defined in regulation, a reconciliation of these non gap financial measures to their most directly comparable gap financial measures is included in world feels press release and can be found on its website.
We'll begin with several minutes of prepared remarks, which will then be followed by a question and answer period, as with prior conference calls, we ask that members of the media and individual private investors on the line participate in listen only mode.

At this time.
I would like to introduce our chairman and chief executive officer, Michael Castlebar.





Speaker :: Michael J. Kasbar -- Chairman and Chief Executive Officer


Thank you, Glenn.
And good evening, everyone.
Once again, our global team has continued to perform extremely well where fuel is truly blessed with the talented and committed group of professionals.
Our employees around the world have continued to follow our safety procedures and protocols, and we have been fortunate to have very few cases of covid-19 our global team continue to do a great job of managing cash risk and operating expenses with expenses down sequentially and driving strong operating cash flow, supporting our healthy liquidity position.
Since we last spoke, we closed on the sale of multiservice, further enhancing our strong liquidity position.
We reshape their workplace model and we continue to manage and grow business activity in our aviation, marine and land business.
During this extended global health and economic crisis, despite the enduring nature of the pandemic related complexities in the world around us, we delivered a very respectable result.
In the third quarter.

Our Marine and aviation business will continue to add value through their differentiated offerings and remain a strategic operating partner for airlines, corporate aircraft operators and global shipping companies.
I'm happy to report that our land fuels natural gas, power and sustainability.
Businesses are breaking into stride operationally and moving from local businesses to national and global operations following the evolution of our marine and aviation segments with which both started the same way.
We are very encouraged by the interest we have received in our unique solution offering and global reach, combined with an accelerated digital rollout.
We are confident that what we have been building for some time is starting to gain momentum today.

In some locations we have zero touch order processing for our clients and suppliers, with invoices being produced in one day and digital content simultaneously appearing in customized portals.
We are building this type of capability throughout our land business and throughout the company.
As you will see in our sustainability report released yesterday, which I encourage you to read, it shows that we have been focused on sustainability and actively involved in the energy transition for years.
You will see that we made our global operations carbon neutral for 2019.
You will also gain a better appreciation for why we recently brought together our land fuels and connect energy management businesses to form World Connect Energy Services.

This has enabled us to simplify energy management for our customers through our ability to provide sourcing and supply of conventional and renewable fuels, electricity, natural gas, as well as the associated fulfillment, logistics and risk management to help our clients on their own low and zero carbon sustainability journey.
A last word on our digitization journey as we are in the middle of an energy and digital transition.
I thought it would be useful for our investors to know where we are and what this can mean for our business.
Just as the pandemic has made people reflect more on their impact on the environment.
So has it underscored the importance of technology to modern living?
As I I've mentioned previously, we decided on Friday, March 13th of this year to have our more than 5000 employees from eighty five offices in 50 countries to work from home starting the following Monday.
We were able to do that for a variety of reasons.
Prior to the pandemic, we had rolled out best of breed collaboration tools in the cloud to keep our team productive and make sure they were better connected than ever.
Holding close to 15000 zoo meetings per month in January will be for everyone work from home.
We digitize the majority of our internal processes and we are now printing millions of fewer pages each year.
We became a cloud first company.

After migrating hundreds of applications to the public cloud, we even digitized and virtualize their video and voice systems, bypassing hardware requirements which better enable their employees to work remotely from day one.
The technology investments we've made in recent years have improved our performance and.
Resilience, allowing us to quickly close their offices and seamlessly move to a remote workforce without issue, as we have said before, our diversified global business platform helps stabilize earnings as different sectors and geographies often offset each other, while the commonalities allow us to capture internal synergies.
In closing, we believe we are well-positioned to weather this pandemic and advance our strategy for long term, profitable, sustainable growth.
I'd like to take a moment to once again thank my colleagues all around the world and world fuel for their dedication and commitment to our customers, suppliers, stakeholders each and every day.
I also want to thank our shareholders for supporting us on our journey.

I'll now turn over the call to IRA for a review of our financial details, followed by Q&A.





Speaker :: Ira M. Birns -- Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer


Thank you, Mike.
And good evening, ladies and gentlemen.
Before getting into the company's results for the third quarter, I would like to thank our employees who have responded to the challenges of Twenty twenty remaining focused on deepening relationships with our customers while supporting one another as well.
We remain grateful for our employees resilience, perseverance and dedication to our business.
And of course, we hope you and your families are healthy and well onto the third quarter results, as usual.
Please note that the following figures exclude the impact of non-operational items in the third quarter, as highlighted in our earnings release.
So not operational income and expenses in the third quarter, principally related to the gain on the sale of our multiservice business, which was completed on September 30th, but also included other acquisition and divestiture and restructuring related expenses to assist you in reconciling results published in our earnings release.

The breakdown of these non-operational items can be found on our website and on the last slide of today's webcast presentation.
Now, let me begin with some of the third quarter highlights.
Volume increase sequentially in all three of our business segments with the most significant rebound being in aviation.
As we announced at the end of September, we completed the sale of our multi service payment solutions business, resulting in an after tax gain of sixty four million dollars or one dollar per share in the third quarter adjusted third quarter net income and earnings per share with twenty point seven dollars million and thirty three cents per share, respectively.

Adjusted even in the third quarter, it was sixty four million dollars.
That's an increase of 13 percent sequentially.
And lastly, we generated two hundred and forty six million dollars of cash flow from operations during the quarter, which, combined with the proceeds from the multiservice sale, enabled us to reduce our gross debt balance by approximately five hundred and seventy million dollars, further increasing our available liquidity and putting us in a net cash position for the first time in nearly 10 years.
Consolidated revenue for the third quarter was four point five dollars billion, negatively impacted by the continued impact of covid-19 on our segment volumes, as well as the overall decline in average fuel prices when compared to last year, sequentially, revenues increased forty two percent, driven by increased volume across all segments and higher average fuel prices.
Our aviation volume was one point eighty two billion gallons, the third quarter, a significant rebound sequentially, but still well below pre covid activity levels.

Cargo activity remains strong, with commercial passenger and business aviation activity experiencing a healthy rebound from the low point in the second quarter.
With the pandemic still looming or in some areas surging, we do not assume meaningful incremental growth in the fourth quarter.
While statistics indicate that commercial passenger activity in the US is slowly improving, down 95 percent in April compared to sixty three percent in recent weeks relative to the same prior year periods.
Volume in our Marine segment for the third quarter was four point four million metric tons, down approximately twenty one percent year over year, but an increase of nine percent sequentially is activity levels modestly rebounded during the third quarter.

Our land segment volume was one point two billion gallons or gallon equivalents during the third quarter.
That's a decrease of eight percent year over year, but an increase of six percent sequentially.
The year of your covid related volume declines were prevalent across our retail, commercial and industrial and wholesale operations, partially offset by increases in our growing world power and natural gas platform.
Regardless, the land team has done a solid job delivering volumes very close to the prior year, despite the impacts of the pandemic.
Consolidated gross profit for the third quarter was two hundred and fourteen dollars million.
That's a decrease of 30 percent compared to the third quarter of twenty nineteen, but flat sequentially.
Our aviation segment contributed ninety eight million dollars of gross profit in the third quarter, down thirty eight percent year over year, but up six percent sequentially while commercial passenger aviation activity increased.

Sequentially related gross profit remains significantly below the prior year.
Continued troop withdrawals in Afghanistan also contributed to the year over year decline in aviation gross profit.
Although near-term activity remains very difficult to forecast, as we look to the fourth quarter, we do expect gross profit to decline sequentially related to a further reduction in government related activity in Afghanistan, seasonal declines in our core business, and the impact of renewed covid related travel restrictions, particularly in parts of Europe.

The Marine segment generated third quarter, third quarter gross profit of thirty two million dollars, that's a decline of 40 percent year over year and 14 percent sequentially.
Year over year, comparison is negatively impacted by the benefits we experienced during the third quarter of last year leading up to the January 1st, very low sulfur climate regulations, compounded with a pandemic related decline in core resale activity, including the cruise sector.
As we look ahead to the fourth quarter, we anticipate that Marine gross profit will be similar to the amount generated in the third quarter.
Our last segment delivered a gross profit of eighty four million dollars in the third quarter, that's down 12 percent year over year, but effectively flat sequentially gross profit in the last segment was slightly better than expected during the quarter, with volumes returning to over 90 percent of prior year levels.
The year of the year, gross profit declined, principally related to the further reduction of government activity in Afghanistan and a reduction in retail and commercial and industrial activity.
Third quarter Landreaux profits still included 19 million dollars of gross profit from multiservice, which again was sold on the last day of the third quarter.
Looking ahead to the fourth quarter, we expect land gross profit to decline, principally related to the multiservice sale offset in part by an increase in activity in the U.K. as we expect seasonal strength in our eating or distribution activities driven in part by EU and higher usage as a result of the pandemic.

Core operating expenses, which exclude bad debt expense, were one hundred and forty eight million dollars in the third quarter, which was below the raise that we provided on last quarter's call as we remain focused on driving cost efficiencies.
While our operating margins have clearly been negatively impacted by the pandemic, our expense reductions to date and our continued focus on our cost structure should help accelerate the return of the three percent operating margins as business activity slowly returns to normal.
We expect core operating expenses to be in the range of one hundred and forty seven to one hundred and fifty two dollars million in the fourth quarter.
Please note, our people have always been and always will be our greatest asset, while covid is certainly created challenges for our business, our global team is put forth a Herculean effort, year-to-date, under unprecedented circumstances, remotely managing the business with excellence day to day, an exceptional working capital management along with significant costs and capex reductions which resulted in a record level of liquidity.
We are also proud of the flawless execution of his investiture of multiservice amid the pandemic, which resulted in an 80 million dollar pre-tax gain.
Our employees have performed admirably and successfully managing our business by focusing and executing on the things within our control to navigate through the negative impacts of the pandemic.
Therefore, we plan to book an additional accrual for incentive compensation for our global team in the fourth quarter, which will allow us to provide them with at least a somewhat reasonable level of incentive compensation under present circumstances.

This is this compensation expense is included in the one hundred and forty seven to one hundred and fifty two million for operating expense estimate provided for the fourth quarter.
With the world's remaining challenge due to the significant impacts of covid-19 on the commercial passenger aviation market and parts of the marine market, particularly the cruise sector, bad debt expense, unfortunately, remain elevated at twenty three point three dollars million in the third quarter.
Despite our diligence and focus in the fact of our accounts receivable, balance is just over 40 percent of 2010 levels with the risk profile of our overall portfolio, clearly improving risk remains elevated when compared to historical norms.

Underwriting has always been a significant core competency in our business, and this year is no different.
We remain focused and diligent on managing our credit risk, including reducing credit lines wherever appropriate.
Adjusted income from operations in the third quarter was forty two million dollars, down significantly from the prior year, of course, but an increase of twenty one percent sequentially.
Third quarter interest expense was nine dollars million, which is down more than 50 percent year over year, our total interest expense continues to benefit from lower average borrowings and significantly lower interest rates.
As a matter of fact, at the end of the third quarter, we had no borrowings outstanding under our revolving credit facility.

Our adjusted effective tax rate was 32 percent in the third quarter, up from 30 percent in the third quarter of 2019.
At this time, we expect our fourth quarter tax rate to be similar to the third quarter.
Our accounts receivable balance declined to approximately one point twenty five billion dollars at the end of the third quarter, down more than 50 percent, or approximately one point six billion dollars from the year end, driven principally by volume declines and lower fuel prices.
Our team continues to do a great job managing working capital, as mentioned earlier, resulting in two hundred and forty six million dollars of operating cash flow with four hundred ninety one dollars million of operating cash flow generated during the first nine months of Twenty twenty.
We continue to benefit from relatively low fuel prices and lower working capital needs, which have enabled us to generate significant amounts of cash flow.

The proceeds received from the multiservice sale, combined with a strong operating cash flow, enabled us to further reduce our debt balance by approximately five hundred and seventy million dollars at the end of the third quarter.
Again, we were actually in a net cash position for the first time in nearly a decade.
In closing, we experienced a modest improvement in the third quarter, generated a significant amount of operating cash flow and successfully completed the sale of multiservice, leaving us with a record level of liquidity at the end of the quarter.
We continue to manage costs carefully, but with significant available capital, we have begun focusing more of our energies on organic growth and strategic investments in particular.

To provide some more color on specific investment opportunities, I would like to highlight a world connect business.
This is a growing business in which we principally participate in the power and natural gas markets, but also solar, wind, carbon and renewables supporting commercial, industrial and government customers globally.
As Mike mentioned earlier, we formally issued our 2013 Sustainability Report earlier this week, which, among other important elements, discusses our participation in these fast growing markets.
While you've been building our capabilities in this area over the past few years, this business activity still represents only a modest portion of our overall revenue and profitability.
With available liquidity at record levels, we intend to make significant strategic investments in this business over the next two to three years with a goal of turning this into a substantially larger business over this time period.
We will also continue to build out our commercial and industrial diesel and gasoline activities, driving synergies and greater scale in both of these two important platforms, all without losing sight of any additional niche opportunities in the aviation and marine markets.
And of course, we remain focused on other ways to drive additional value for our shareholders.
Thank you very much for your time.
Please be safe.

I would like to turn the call back over to Eric or operator to the Q&A session.





