Speaker :: Karen Fletcher -- Vice President, Investor Relations


Okay.
Thank you, Julienne.
Good morning, and welcome to ITW's Second Quarter 2020 Conference Call.
I'm joined by our Chairman and CEO, Scott Santi; and Senior Vice President and CFO, Michael Larsen.
During today's call, we will discuss ITW's second quarter 2020 financial results and provide an update on our strategy for managing through the global pandemic.
slide two is a reminder that this presentation contains forward-looking statements.
We refer you to the company's 2019 Form 10-K and subsequent reports filed with the SEC for more detail about important risks that could cause actual results to differ materially from our expectations, including the potential effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on our business.
This presentation uses certain non-GAAP measures and a reconciliation of those measures to the most comparable GAAP measures is contained in the press release.
Please turn to slide three, and it's now my pleasure to turn the call over to our Chairman and CEO, Scott Santi.





Speaker :: E. Scott Santi -- Chairman and Chief Executive Officer


Thank you, Karen.
Good morning, everyone.
While things are far from normal for any of us or our businesses at present, I'm extremely proud of how the ITW team is managing through the unprecedented and challenging circumstances brought about by the pandemic.
I want to begin by sincerely thanking my ITW colleagues around the world for the effort, dedication and selflessness that they continue to demonstrate daily and protecting the health and safety of their colleagues while continuing to serve our customers with excellence.
As I have said many times, the power of the ITW business model and of our decentralized entrepreneurial culture are never more valuable than during times of significant and rapid change.
And we are leveraging both to position the company to participate across a wide range of recovery scenarios while continuing to execute on our long-term strategy to achieve and sustain ITW's full potential performance.
Over the last seven years, we have made significant progress in executing our strategy to take full advantage of our unique strengths to clearly establish ITW as one of the world's best-performing, highest-quality and most respected industrial companies, and in doing so, building a company that has both the enduring competitive advantages and the resiliency necessary to deliver consistent upper tier performance in any economic environment.

Well, needless to say, the resilience component of that equation is now being tested in ways that were hard for many of us to even imagine six to seven months ago.
And as evidenced by our second quarter results, this company and our team of over 45,000 dedicated professionals are arising to the challenge.
In the second quarter, in the face of an unprecedented 29% decline in revenues, ITW delivered $449 million in operating income, $681 million in free cash flow and operating margins of 17.5%.
We leveraged our flexible cost structure to reduce operating expenses by more than $140 million without any centralized cost takeout mandate from corporate while providing full compensation and benefit support to every ITW team member, sustaining investments in key long-term growth strategies and positioning for full participation in the recovery.
As we outlined during our first quarter earnings call, we have an integrated 4-pronged strategy for managing the company through the pandemic: protect and support our people, continue to serve our customers with excellence, maintain our financial strength and strategic optionality and win the recovery.
These four priorities comprise the central near-term planning and execution focus for the whole of ITW and for every one of our operating divisions.

We'll come back to them at the end of our presentation, but first, let me turn the call over to Michael, who will provide you with additional detail on our Q2 performance.
Michael, over to you.





Speaker :: Michael M. Larsen -- Senior Vice President & Chief Financial Officer


Okay.
Thank you, Scott, and good morning, everyone.
Let's turn to slide five.
As Scott mentioned, priority number three for managing through the pandemic is to maintain ITW's considerable financial strength, liquidity and strategic optionality.
In the second quarter, we did just that.
And going forward, we will continue to deliver on that priority as we leverage our strong financial foundation and resilient profitability profile to position ITW for maximum participation in the recovery.
On our last earnings call, we shared our expectation for an unprecedented level of demand contraction due to the complete shutdown of wide swathes of the global economy.
And indeed, organic revenues declined an unprecedented 27%.
As expected, Automotive OEM and Food Equipment were the hardest hit segments.
Other segments fared much better, providing another proof point for the benefit of ITW's diversified high-quality business portfolio.

At the enterprise level, total revenues declined 29% as organic revenues declined 27%, and foreign currency and last year's divestitures further reduced revenues by about one point each.
Nevertheless, our businesses still generated $449 million of operating income and delivered resilient operating margin performance of 17.5%, with operating expenses down more than $140 million and enterprise initiatives contributing 100 basis points.
As expected, free cash flow was strong at $681 million, an increase of 12% year-over-year and 213% of net income.
Q2 cash flow performance did benefit from the delayed timing of U.S. income tax payments of $158 million, which were paid in the third quarter.
Our divisions stepped up their credit monitoring and collection efforts early in the quarter, and as a result, our receivable performance has continued to remain in line with historical norms.
The balance sheet and our liquidity remained strong throughout the containment phase as we ended the quarter with $1.8 billion of cash on hand, essentially no short-term debt, no commercial paper, a $2.5 billion undrawn revolving credit facility, Tier one credit ratings and total liquidity of more than $4.3 billion.

As expected, ITW had more than enough financial strength and resilience to withstand the shock to the system that the global economy experienced in Q2.
We were prepared for it, we managed our way through it effectively, and today, we're strongly positioned for the recovery.
With that, please turn to slide six for a retrospective look at second quarter revenue, starting with organic revenue by geography.
As you can see, the demand contraction was global as North America declined 26%, Europe was down 37% and Asia Pacific was down 7%.
On a positive note, China was up 1% after being down 24% in Q1 as the early phase of their recovery began to take hold.
On the right side of the slide, we're sharing average revenue per working day by month as we moved through the quarter and we compared it to last year.
You can see that April was the bottom, and then we experienced a sequential acceleration in May and in June as the global economy began to reopen.
This trend has continued in July.

Now let's go to slide seven for segment performance.
And on the left side, you can see the most and least affected segments in terms of organic revenue and operating margin.
For comparative purposes, I should point out that these margin numbers are fully loaded operating margins, not segment margins.
It is also notable that five of seven segments delivered operating margins above 20% despite organic revenue declines ranging from 9% to 25%.
And the two segments overcame the significant negative volume leverage to actually expand operating margin year-over-year.
Turning to the right side of slide seven.
As expected, given that most of our Automotive OEM customers in North America and Western Europe essentially shut down in mid-March and only began to restart production in May, June, our Automotive OEM business was the hardest hit.
Overall, organic revenues were down 53% year-over-year, although we did see a significant uptick in June that is continuing in July.
North America was down 62%; Europe, down 59%; and China was the bright spot with organic revenue up 6%.

Importantly, as auto production continues to ramp up in Q3, our local, close to the customer manufacturing positions remain fully resourced and in position to continue to serve our customers every step of the way and with the same world-class quality and delivery that they have come to expect from us.
Turning to slide eight.
Also, as expected, the second hardest hit segment was Food Equipment as organic revenue declined 38%.
North America organic revenue was down 33% and international declined 44%.
Equipment sales were down 38% and service was down 37%.
Institutional sales, including healthcare facilities and hospitals were slightly more resilient, down about 30%.
And not surprisingly, restaurants, QSR were down about 45%.
Relatively speaking, sales to grocery retail customers held up better, down only 14%, with some equipment orders being pushed out due to COVID concerns, and retail service sales were flat with prior year.
Test & Measurement and Electronics organic revenue declined 11%, with Test & Measurement down 12% and Electronics down 9%.

While demand for capex equipment dropped, sales were up double digits in end markets tied to semiconductor, healthcare and clean room technology.
And despite negative volume leverage, operating margin improved 120 basis points to 25.7% with excellent cost management and enterprise initiatives as the main contributors.
Turning to slide nine.
In Welding, demand slowed significantly as organic revenue declined by 25% with equipment sales down 28% and consumables down 21%.
Industrial end markets declined 40% while commercial end markets were fairly resilient, down only 11%.
That said, despite a 29% decline in revenues, Q2 operating margin was 21.6%.
Polymers & Fluids organic revenue was down 14%.
Polymers was down 20%, in line with industrial and MRO trends.
Auto Aftermarket was down 14%, with retail sales improving in a meaningful way as stores opened back up as the quarter progressed.
Fluids had the best performance, with organic revenue down only 5% helped by product sales into health and hygiene end markets.
Operating margin was up 30 basis points to 23.1%, driven by enterprise initiatives and strong tactical cost management.
Moving to Slide 10.
Construction organic revenue was down 9% with North America, which is almost half the segment, up 1%, with double-digit growth in the residential renovation market served through the home center channel.
This strength was partially offset by a 21% decline in the North America commercial business and internationally as Europe was down 28%, reflecting a more restrictive quarantine protocol.
Australia and New Zealand sales were down only 3%.
Specialty organic revenue was down 16%, with North America down 15% and the international side down 19%.
Demand for consumables in our consumer packaging businesses, such as Zip-Pak, were up double digits, offset by orders for packaging equipment being pushed out and some lower sales into the appliance and aviation industry.

So let's move to Slide 11 for an update on some full year 2020 performance scenarios.
On our last call, we provided three financial scenarios to illustrate the fact that we have the financial strength and margin profile to withstand whatever comes our way over the near term.
And therefore, our number one priority is positioning to play offense in the recovery.
With Q2 in the books, we're updating these scenarios for our key operating metrics, organic revenue, operating margin and operating income.
The caveat that we discussed during our Q1 call still apply.
i.e., this is the time of extraordinary and unprecedented uncertainty and accepting any significant recurrence of major economic shutdowns.
As you can see, we are narrowing the range of likely full year outcomes based on our second quarter performance and current demand trends across the company.
And what stands out is that in all three scenarios, ITW's operating performance is strong in terms of operating income and operating margin.
And while we're not providing formal guidance as we sit here today, we are tracking closest to the mid scenario, with second half organic revenues down about 12%, which would translate into a full year organic decline of approximately 14.5% and operating margins of 20% to 22%.
And in an unprecedented year like this, should this scenario hold, we would still make somewhere in the neighborhood of $2.5 billion of operating income and generate more than $1.8 billion in free cash flow.
As demand recovers, we want to be in a strong position to fully support our customers as their businesses begin to reaccelerate.

As a result, we expect an increase in working capital and, therefore, lower free cash flow of about $600 million in the second half of the year.
Importantly though, we are going to make sure that we're in a strong position to both respond to our customers' needs and take share from competitors who can't throughout the recovery.
As we discussed on the last call, we're going to make some fairly modest capacity and cost structure adjustments based on projects submitted by our division leaders who have now had a chance to better assess the pace and slope of recovery in each of their respective businesses.
We currently project that we will spend about $60 million in restructuring projects in the second half of the year, including $45 million of 80/20 front-to-back projects that were already planned for 2020 that we placed on a temporary hold as the early stages of the pandemic unfolded.
As a reference, we spent about $80 million on restructuring in 2019 and about $30 million of that was in the second half of the year.
It is worth noting that the average payback for these projects is projected to be less than 12 months.
Finally, just some brief comments on capital allocation and to let you know that our position has not changed from our last call.
First, with regard to the dividend, we recognize the importance of our dividend to our long-term shareholders.
We continue to view it as a critical component of ITW's total shareholder return model, and we remain strongly committed to the dividend.
In terms of strategic optionality, we are clearly in a position of strength with ample liquidity and balance sheet capacity and strong credit ratings.
We remain open to the possibility that opportunities might emerge as a result of the pandemic.
And we're in a strong position to react to high-quality strategic opportunities that are aligned with our enterprise strategy.
Lastly, we suspended share repurchases until end markets stabilize and the recovery path becomes clearer.
So let's move on to slide 12, and I'll turn it back over to Scott to share some more thoughts on our recovery phase strategy.
Scott, back to you.





Speaker :: E. Scott Santi -- Chairman and Chief Executive Officer


All right.
Thank you, Michael.
So moving forward, while significant end market disruption and uncertainties remain, we will continue to leverage our financial strength and the performance power of our business model to prioritize playing offense in the recovery over playing defense in the contraction and to ensure that every one of our businesses is strongly positioned to fully participate in the recovery.
Job one is to protect our people while continuing to serve our customers with the world-class quality and delivery performance that they expect from us.
Thus far, our people have done a superb job on both fronts, and across the company, we will remain intensely focused on these two mission-critical imperatives.

Second, we are going to lean in hard to the upside by remaining invested in staff to support anticipated demand two to three quarters out, so that we have ample cushion to fully support our customers as their businesses reaccelerate and to capture incremental share gain opportunities that we expect might emerge along the way.
In that regard, core to the recovery planning process in every one of our 84 divisions is the identification and actioning of specific pandemic-related share gain programs and opportunities that are aligned with our long-term enterprise strategy.
Finally, we will leverage our advantaged financial position to sustain the investments we've made to support the execution of our enterprise strategy.
We are taking the long view, and from that perspective, win the recovery as an execution component of our long-term enterprise strategy.
It is not a separate strategy.
It is about every one of our divisions identifying specific opportunities to aggressively accelerate progress in executing key aspects of their enterprise strategy agenda due to the effects of the pandemic, things such as new or changing customer needs, competitor distress, ability to stay invested, etc.
In fact, we're already seeing areas of opportunity emerging in our businesses and these are some of the early themes.
First, ITW's undisrupted ability to supply and deliver during these times of tremendous volatility and disruption is a significant asset.
In the last quarter, we landed new programs worth a combined $105 million annually with a handful of key customers based largely on our ability to provide immediate supply.

Second, many companies, including many of our existing customers are moving away from low-cost country sourcing strategies and looking to localize their supply chains in response to risks and challenges exposed first by trade and tariff-related disruptions and now by the effects of the pandemic.
Our long-standing commitment to local, produce where we sell manufacturing has uniquely positioned ITW to support existing and new customers in making this transition.
Just recently, one of our businesses was awarded nearly $10 million in new business as a result of one of their key customers moving to build more local supply capability.
In addition, a number of our Automotive OEM customers are implementing strategies to localize their supply chains, and we are in a very strong position to support them in this regard.
And third, we are already benefiting from remaining committed to our strategic sales excellence and customer-backed innovation investments.
Our ability to stay the course means that the people that we have invested in, in these critical areas remain in place and that they are not distracted by downsizings, reorganizations, top-down mandates or shifting priorities.
They remain focused on serving customers, seizing new opportunities and continuing to innovate.
As just one illustration, in the second quarter, our new patent filings were up 24% over last year.

So in closing, on behalf of Michael and I and our entire executive leadership team, we offer our deepest thanks to our ITW colleagues around the world for their exceptional efforts and dedication always but especially during this period of unprecedented circumstances and challenges.
While there is obviously a lot that we will have to work our way through in the months ahead, I have no doubt that the strength and resilience of ITW's business model, our diversified high-quality business portfolio and our people position us extremely well to seize the opportunities and respond to the challenges that lie ahead.







Speaker :: Karen Fletcher -- Vice President, Investor Relations


Okay.
Thank you, Scott.
Julienne, let's open up the lines for questions.





