Speaker :: Daniel Briggs -- Senior Vice President Investor Relations


Thank you.
Joining on the call today are Rob Goldstein, our chairman and chief executive officer; and Patrick Dumont, our president and chief operating officer.
Also, joining me on the call are Dr. Wilfred Wong, president of Sands China; and Grant Chum, chief operating officer, Sands China.

Before I turn the call over to Rob, please let me remind you that today's conference call will contain forward-looking statements that we are making under the safe-harbor provision of federal securities laws.
The company's actual results could differ materially from the anticipated results in those forward-looking statements.
In addition, we may discuss non-GAAP measures.
A definition and a reconciliation of each of these measures and the most comparable GAAP financial measures is included in the press release.



Please note that we have posted supplementary earnings slides on our Investor Relations website.
You may refer to the slides during the Q&A portion of the call.
[Operator instructions] Please note that this presentation is being recorded.
With that, let me please turn the call over to Rob.





Speaker :: Rob Goldstein -- Chairman and Chief Executive Officer


Thank you, Daniel.
Good afternoon, everyone, and thank you for joining us today.
The last two weeks have been the most difficult in our company's history as we mourn the loss of our founder, Sheldon Adelson.
Sheldon, as you know, was a visionary.

He led the transformation of not one but three integrated resort markets, that being Las Vegas, Macao, and Singapore.
He offered the MICE-based Integrated Resort model in Las Vegas.
He pioneered the development of the Cotai Strip in Macao and reimagined the skyline of Singapore to the iconic Marina Bay Sands.
His audacity to challenge the status quo transformed the entire market.

In Las Vegas, Sheldon originated the convention-based Integrated Resort model when no one, and I mean no one, who believe in its viability or sustainability.
Today, Las Vegas conventions are synonymous.
In the Macao community, Sheldon's vision for Cotai defied the consensus thinking at that time.
Every element of Macao is questioned by the skeptics, and I mean every omen.

A 3,000 room all-suite hotel, when the overnight tours market almost didn't exist, existing hotel inventory was very limited.
The Grand Canal Shoppes with over 300 retail stores in a market that had virtually no retail.
A 13,000-seat arena and 1.2 million square foot convention center.
He dreamt big but he also delivered, who developed a critical mass of world-class integrated resorts at a record speed.

Before others could even dare to dream, he completed the Venetian Macao in 2007 and was the fifth year of our company's 20-year concession.
His determination pushing forward diversification and investment in non-gaming in Macao, was unwavering and breathtaking to be part of.
Our total investment account today exceeds USD 15 billion.
We know that Sheldon was a big believer of a strong, healthy, and cordial U.S.-China relationship.

He believed it was to the benefit of both countries to maintain a bilateral relationship based on mutual respect.
The company, the board, and the family are absolutely committed to continuing Sheldon's efforts in this regard.
Sheldon is irreplaceable as the visionary founder of our company, of the unmatched portfolio of integrated resort assets, and the management team he assembled to operate and expand the business in the future remain here in place, ready to work.
The DNA of the company that Sheldon founded will remain ever-present.

The company with the full and wholehearted support of the board and the family will continue to honor Sheldon's vision to protect and enhance his legacy.
We look forward to the future and do so with a lot of confidence and optimism.
While the pandemic continues to impact our business adversely, we have achieved positive EBITDA in both Macao and Singapore in the fourth quarter, and there's no doubt, in my mind, our business was down to pre-COVID levels in the future.
In Macao, the Grand Suite Four Seasons is now open, and the first phase of Londoner Macao will officially open in February.

We are very excited about the progressive unveiling of the Londoner Macao throughout the course of '21.
Sands China is well-positioned to capture a rebound in tourism when the pandemic finally does subside.
We've always believed there's no better market for our company to invest in than Macao.
We will continue to invest in our resort product, nurture our local talent and, of course, support the local community, which we are grateful to.

In Singapore, we remained very committed to long-term investment in Marina Bay Sands, including both the upgrading of our existing facilities and the expansion of that property.
On a principal note, I spent more than two decades with Sheldon.
And had both fun and the pleasure of working for and with Sheldon.
He was a great mentor, he was a great friend.

And I guess what speaks volumes about his generosity and decency is reflected in the decision to continue to pay our team members, even after the dramatically impacted our business.
He was adamant that team members continue to receive pay and health benefits, even while we're closing our buildings and it was abundantly clear that our business will be hampered for quite some time.
In the days since he has passed, we received condolences from around the world from global leaders, elected officials, business partners, investors, customers, and many of you joining us on the call today.
We are touched by the outpouring of support, and we really appreciate that.

I am honored to have been invited by the board of Las Vegas Sands and Sands China to become the chairman and CEO of both companies.
With the full support of the board and the family, I will work hard on upskilling team members, the management team to fulfill Sheldon's extraordinary vision.
I am confident, as Sheldon in 1995, that this company will go from strength to strength in the future.
For one final thought before we turn to questions, I look forward to the day, we can say, yield dividends.

Thanks, we are ready for questions.





