Speaker :: Steve Keenan -- Director of Investor Relations


Thank you, Sarah.
Good morning, everyone, and thank you for joining us today.
Before we begin, let me remind you that this discussion, along with the associated slides and the question-and-answer session that follows, will include statements regarding estimates or expectations of future performance.
Please note that these are forward-looking statements and that actual results could differ materially from those projected.
Some of the factors that could cause actual results to differ from our projections are described without limitations in the Risk Factors section of our most recent Form 10-K and in yesterday's first quarter earnings press release.

A copy of today's transcript and slides will be available on our website in the Investors section under past events.
Our earnings press release and other financial data and information are available under press releases.
With me this morning are Scott Sutton, Olin's Chief Executive Officer; Pat Dawson, President, Epoxy and International; Damian Gumpel, President, Chlor Alkali Products and Vinyls; Jim Varilek, Olin's Chief Operating Officer; and Todd Slater, Olin's Chief Financial Officer.
Scott will begin with some brief remarks, and thereafter, we will be happy to take your questions.

I'll now turn the call over to Scott Sutton.





Speaker :: Scott M. Sutton -- Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer


Yes.
Thanks, Steve, and hello to everyone.
Look, I'm super proud of the Olin team for their passion, results and for their optimism for our future.
Because of their optimism and success, I have the opportunity to pull forward our value creation formula story.
First of all, Olin is on track to deliver more than $1.8 billion of adjusted EBITDA this year.
One proof point to that track is that second quarter adjusted EBITDA is expected to exceed first quarter adjusted EBITDA, excluding Uri onetime impacts, even though we have significant turnarounds in the second quarter.
The third quarter adjusted EBITDA should also exceed the second quarter.
So it is time to start projecting toward a higher adjusted EBITDA of $2.5 billion and above in future years, the emphasis really being on the above.

For clarity, 2022 is expected to be a positive stepping stone toward that direction.
Some key activity to bridge that gap to $2.5 billion are shown on Slide number four.
But maybe Slide number five tells a more comprehensive story to that $2.5 billion and above.
Olin is quickly moving through four phases of evolution.
We have already discussed the first two with you on prior earnings calls, and we are currently in Phase two, the leading phase, as we enhance our unique model of optimizing value first across the whole ECU.
Think of leading as solving the ECU co-production conundrum by setting our participation to the weak side of the ECU, anticipating potential value inflection points and then activating to achieve a desired response.

Shortly, we'll be looking to take our innovative model and apply it across multiple millions of tons of similar molecules and parlay the model into a much larger business.
All kinds of commercial strategies will be employed in this Phase three of parlaying, including bartering, sophisticated trading and differentiated alliances to better serve customers.
Simultaneously, Olin will be preparing for Phase four, structuring, as we look to take proceeds from our cash flow machine and invest them in a smart way to expand our beneficial footprint.
Please don't miss our internal equity price target in the lower corner of that slide.
Okay.
Let me pull back to today a bit and fill in some key activities and results.

Slide number six shows that in the first quarter, we matched our market participation to the weak side of the ECU.
In other words, we sold less caustic, which not only allowed us to hold up caustic value relative to the fourth quarter, but more importantly, allowed us to significantly expand value throughout our chlorine and chlorine derivatives chain.
I think the lift in the ECU PCI shown on Slide number seven clearly shows the positive results.
That value impact was also significantly expanded by the innovative actions taken by our Epoxy team, as shown on Slide number eight.
Olin is the world's leader in Epoxy and our wins continue to stack up as we place our offering with key customers and into key applications.

Look, I would also like to highlight the updates made to our Olin ESG scorecard in the appendix slides.
We are generally delivering to many of the commitments made in our sustainability report, but we still have a lot of work to get fully on track here.
Again, this demonstrates the team's comprehensive passion for Olin's broader contribution.
So before opening this call up to QandA, let me wrap it all up into contemporary value on Slide number nine.
Our team's shared success in leading and running toward parlaying is forecasted to generate roughly $1.1 billion of levered free cash flow this year, which is the current stock price represents a yield of roughly 16%, really attractive, considering we're just in the early stages of our push for shareholder value delivery.

Okay.
I mean that concludes my opening comments.
And operator, we're now ready to take questions.





