Speaker :: Joe Calabrese -- Senior Vice President at Financial Relations Board


Thank you.
Good afternoon, everyone, and thank you for joining us for the Old Republic conference call to discuss first quarter 2021 results.
This morning, we distributed a copy of the press release and posted a separate statistical supplement which we assume you have seen and/or otherwise have access to during the call.
Both of the documents are available at Old Republic's website, which is www.
oldrepublic.com.

Please be advised that this call may involve forward-looking statements as discussed in the press release and statistical supplements dated April 22, 2020.
Risks associated with these statements can be found in the Company's latest SEC filings.
This afternoon's conference call will be led by Craig Smiddyori, President and CEO of Old Republic International Corporation; and several other senior executive members as planned for this meeting.

At this time, I'd like to turn the call over to Craig Smiddyori.
Please go ahead, sir.





Speaker :: Craig R. Smiddyori -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Okay.
Thank you, Joe.
Well, good afternoon, everyone, and welcome again to Old Republic's First Quarter 2021 Earnings Call.
With me today, we have our CFO, Karl Muellerori, and we have Carolyn Monroe, the President of our Title Insurance Group.

So we're here again with another great quarter that we're very happy with.
Exceptional performance in both General Insurance and Title Insurance drove the strong consolidated results we posted for the first quarter.
Total net premium and fees increased to $1.84 billion in the quarter, up 18% with consolidated pre-tax operating income of $255 million, up 47%, and a consolidated combined ratio that was 4.2 percentage points lower for the quarter coming in at a 90.9%.

In General Insurance, we saw a slight growth in premium.
Relative to the first quarter of 2021, premiums were not yet impacted by the effects of the pandemic.
And in Title Insurance, we grew premiums and fees by 40% and that was on top of a record-setting first quarter in 2020.
So as demonstrated in the strong results, our specialty strategy continues to produce growth and profitability and our diverse portfolio of specialty products in both General Insurance and Title Insurance has again delivered value to our shareholders.

So with that, I'll turn the discussion over to Karl to discuss some of the per-share figures along with some added color on our investment portfolio, then he'll turn things back to me to cover General Insurance, and that will follow by Carolyn, who will discuss the Title Insurance and then, of course, we'll open up to Q&A.
So, Karl, would you go ahead and take it from here?





Speaker :: Karl W. Muellerori -- Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer


Thank you, Craig, and good afternoon.
This morning we announced first quarter net income, excluding all investment gains and losses of $206 million or $0.69 per diluted share, which is a 47% increase compared to last year's first quarter.
Additionally, shareholders' equity rose to $6.45 billion and book value per share grew to $21.59, that's about a 5.1% increase for the quarter inclusive of all regular dividends.

So now, let me briefly address a couple of key elements regarding Old Republic's financial condition.
First of all, relative to investments, we did not make any fundamental change to our investment strategy during the first quarter this year and at this point, don't anticipate any material shifts in policy in the near term.
The investment portfolio at March 31st, consisted of approximately 72% that were directed toward highly rated bonds and short-term investments with the remaining 28% allocated to large-cap stocks that have a long history of paying and increasing their dividend distributions.

The valuation of the equity portfolio improved by $367 million during final -- first quarter, excuse me, and ended March with an unrealized gain of $1.15 billion.
Net investment income actually decreased by 8.6% for the quarter as the impact of lower yields on new investment purchases more than offset a modest increase in the invested asset base.

The average maturity on the bond portfolio remained consistent at approximately four years and the average book yield declined slightly at the end of the quarter to 2.6%.
New money was invested at yields just below 2% during the quarter, putting downward pressure on net investment income that is likely to persist throughout the remainder of 2021.

Turning now to the liability side of the balance sheet.
Claim reserves grew to $10.8 billion at the end of March and were affected by lower paid loss trends due to the pandemic.
All three segments recognized favorable claim reserve development for the quarter and in total, the consolidated claim ratios benefited by 1.8 percentage points for this year's first quarter by comparison to 0.8% a year ago.

And then finally, with respect to our mortgage run-off operation, there is really nothing particularly noteworthy this quarter other than to point out that we did in fact resume dividend payments following last year's temporary suspension of capital return.
During this first quarter, the business received approval from our regulators and paid a $25 million dividend to our parent company.
So at the end of March, our mortgage company's GAAP shareholders' equity totaled $435 million.

So that is the highlighted and with that, I'm going to turn things back to Craig to dive into the General Insurance group.





Speaker :: Craig R. Smiddyori -- President and Chief Executive Officer


All right.
Well, turning to General Insurance, net premiums written increased in the first quarter that followed increases in the third and fourth quarters of last year and we also saw net premiums earned start to increase again in the first quarter.
Compared to the first quarter of 2020, pre-tax operating income rose by almost 28% primarily from our improved claim ratios.

The overall combined ratio for the General Insurance group improved 4 percentage points from 95.6% to 91.6% quarter-over-quarter.
The claim ratios reported were of course inclusive of favorable prior period development which was 2.7 percentage point in this quarter compared to favorable development of 0.7 percentage points in the first quarter of 2020.
Net premiums written into commercial auto grew by 8% with positive effect from continued rate increases in the auto liability line and those were rate increases in the 15% range.
And that comes along with a growing exposure base in recent quarters as well.

Our first quarter commercial auto claim ratio improved at 73.8% compared to 77% in the first quarter of 2020.
Claim frequency is still lower than pre-pandemic levels but continues to be offset by higher severity due to greater speed than continued pressure on settlement values.

Turning to workers' compensation.
Net premiums written and earned were 15% lower when compared to the first quarter of 2020 where premiums were not yet influenced by the effects of the pandemic.
Slight premium rate increases continued this quarter on the workers' compensation line.
The workers' comp first quarter claim ratio came in at 56% compared to 71% in the first quarter of 2020, and non-COVID related claim frequency remains lower than it was at pre-pandemic levels.
As we talked about in prior quarters, the impact of COVID-19 workers' compensation claims remains insignificant with about 95% of the COVID-19 workers' comp claims coming from loss-sensitive business and greater than 95% of the COVID claims continuing to be mild.
And I can also report that newly reported claims, dropped significantly over the course of the first quarter.

As most of you know, we typically provide commercial auto workers' comp and general liability together in our product offering and this combined claim ratio came in at 69.2% compared to 74.1% in last year's first quarter.
The financial indemnity lines, property line, and our other coverage category, those claim ratios remained very healthy and very steady when you look at quarter-over-quarter results.

So in General Insurance, we continue with our strategy to enhance underwriting excellence through better segmentation, improved risk selection, pricing precision, increased use of analytics along with our focus on providing loss-sensitive programs.
This -- we believe this strategy will continue to facilitate strong underwriting profitability, which we believe is even more important now in order to offset the declining investment income that we just spoke about.
And the good news is, the marketplace remains favorable for us to continue to obtain appropriate prices for our products while maintaining high retention ratios.

So, I'll now turn the discussion over to Carolyn who along with the rest of her team in the Title Insurance group continue to knock the cover off the ball.
So, Carolyn, I'll turn it to you.





Speaker :: Carolyn Monroe -- President, Title Insurance Group


Thank you, Craig, and good afternoon, everyone.
The Title Group is pleased to report record-setting first-quarter results for both operating revenue and operating profit.
Our employees continue to effectively balance the challenges, although improving the in-person commerce with the opportunities provided by the current U.S. mortgage origination market.

Total premium and fee revenue for the quarter was just shy of $1 billion at $967 million, up approximately 40% from the comparable prior period.
This was achieved through the contributions of both our agency and direct operations.
For the quarter, agency premiums, which are typically recorded on about a one-quarter lag compared to our direct premiums, were up nearly 43%.
And premium and fees from our direct operations were up around 32%.
Our pre-tax operating income of $103 million for the quarter compared to $43 million in last year's first quarter.
An increase of $60 million or 139%.
The combined ratio of 90.3% for the quarter represents around a 5% improvement over last year's first quarter combined ratio of 95.1%.

Having begun the year with a solid foundation, we remain optimistic for the remainder of the year.
Mortgage rates are expected to remain near historic lows throughout 2021 providing a catalyst for continued robust real estate market.
Although refinance transactions are projected to drop over 35%, this is in comparison to 2020's record-setting volume, and relatively speaking, will still be at a healthy level.
To offset the refinance drop, purchase money transactions are forecast to be up around 16%.
Of course, this is good for our business as home sales offer greater opportunities for premiums and fees.

As always, we will move forward with our guiding principles of integrity, managing for the long run, financial strength, protection of our policyholders, and the well-being of our employees and customers with an added emphasis of appreciation for our employees, their dedication, ingenuity, and positive attitudes.

And with that, I will turn the call back over to Craig.





Speaker :: Craig R. Smiddyori -- President and Chief Executive Officer


All right, Carolyn, congratulations again.
Well, again, we're very pleased with this quarter's operating results.
Our strategy of providing specialty insurance and related specialty products to core industry served by General Insurance and Title Insurance continues to produce strong results for our shareholders.

So that concludes our prepared remarks and we'll now open up the discussion to Q&A, where I'll answer your question or I'll ask Karl or Carolyn to respond.





