Speaker :: Aaron Paul Diefenthaler -- Vice President, Chief Investment Officer and Treasurer


Thank you, Chelsea.
Good morning, and welcome to RLI's Third Quarter Earnings Call for 2021.
Joining us today are Jon Michael, Chairman and CEO; Craig Kliethermes, President and Chief Operating Officer; and Todd Bryant, Chief Financial Officer.
As usual, Todd will kick things off by walking through the financials.
Craig will follow with additional comments on current market conditions and our product portfolio.
We'll then open the call to questions, and Jon will close with some final thoughts.
Todd?





Speaker :: Todd Wayne Bryant -- Vice President and Chief Financial Officer


Thanks, Aaron, and good morning, everyone.
Yesterday, we reported third quarter operating earnings of $0.65 per share.
The quarter's results were negatively impacted by hurricanes, most notably, Hurricane Ida.
But solid underwriting results, excluding catastrophes, as well as favorable benefits from prior year's loss reserves, positively impacted earnings.
All in, we experienced 18% top line growth and posted a 94.6% combined ratio for the quarter.
Year-to-date, our combined ratio stands at 88.9%.
From investments, income advanced 8% in the quarter as continued strong operating cash flow, $116 million in the quarter and $280 million for the year, have been additive to our invested asset base.
Earnings for Maui Jim and Prime were up 3% in the quarter and while not core, continue to be a benefit to earnings.

Realized gains were relatively flat in the quarter, while changes in unrealized gains and losses on equity securities were impacted by varying amounts of market volatility on a quarterly and year-to-date basis.
As mentioned in prior calls, large movements in equity prices in comparable periods could have a significant on net earnings, which you can see in both the quarterly and year-to-date comparisons to 2020.
Aggregate underwriting and investment results pushed book value per share to $27.63, up 13% from year-end inclusive of dividends.
Craig will talk more about premium in a minute.
But at a high level, all three segments experienced growth as we continue to take advantage of favorable market conditions in most areas of our business.

From an underwriting income perspective, this quarter's combined ratio was 94.6% compared to 99.5% a year ago.
Both periods were impacted by elevated hurricane losses.
Hurricane losses in the quarter were within our preannounced range and totaled $34 million net of reinsurance.
$33 million of that is from our property segment, and $1 million impacted casualty, where a number of our packaged policies are reported.
Net of bonus-related impacts, the events totaled $28.9 million or $0.50 per share net of tax, and added 11 points to the quarter's combined ratio.
From a prior year's reserves perspective, all three segments experienced favorable development.
Casualty led the way with $26 million of favorable loss emergence spread across the majority of product lines.
Moving to expenses.

Our quarterly expense ratio decreased by 2.7 points to 37.9% as did general corporate expenses.
The declines are due in part to reductions in certain bonus measures but are also reflective of the increase in net earned premium and improved leverage on certain expenses.
Turning to investments.
It was a flat total return quarter with income offsetting modest price declines in the portfolio.
Overall market yields remain subdued, but we have seen a little uplift recently as 10-year yields inched back toward the highs we saw in late March.
Operating cash flow remains the primary support for growth in investment income, which turned positive in the quarter.
There have been a few shift -- there have been a few shifts in the allocation over the course of the year, but our strategy continues to focus on putting money to work in nearly all environments.
Apart from the capital markets exposure, investee earnings were up slightly from the comparable period in 2020, with Maui Jim and Prime contributing $5.4 million and $4.4 million, respectively.
All in all, a very good quarter and strong first nine months of the year.

And with that, I'll turn the call over to Craig.





Speaker :: Craig William Kliethermes -- President and Chief Operating Officer


And before I start, I'm going to try to ask Chelsea maybe if she would go back and maybe read the forward-looking statements that I think we maybe forgot to do at the beginning.





Speaker :: Todd Wayne Bryant -- Vice President and Chief Financial Officer


I didn't do any forward look, Craig.
So as long as you don't either, we're going to be OK.





Speaker :: Craig William Kliethermes -- President and Chief Operating Officer


I'll make my comments assuming that those have been implied and read.
Yes, so thank you, Aaron and Todd, and good morning, everyone.
As Todd mentioned, a very good quarter in light of Hurricane Ida and smaller catastrophes that impacted our customers and our results.
After factoring in these events, we were still able to report a sub-95 combined ratio for the quarter and more than 10 points of underwriting profit year-to-date.
At the same time, we are growing our portfolio through rate and exposure, reporting 18% top line growth for the quarter and 21% year-to-date.

We continue to see rate increases across most of the portfolio, although there is some tapering in spots.
We are maintaining a good flow of business that meets our discerning appetite.
The business we are underwriting is generally stickier with higher renewal retention and new business hit ratios.
We are monitoring impacts from the supply chain and labor shortages as well as derived inflation.
Our talented underwriting and claim teams are working diligently to mitigate any resulting increase in loss costs by identifying risks, sharing information across our businesses adequately pricing the tailored coverage we provide and taking advantage of any market disruption.
Now to some more specific comments at the segment level.

In casualty, we reported an 86% combined ratio for the quarter and 84% year-to-date.
We were able to achieve an overall casualty rate increase of 9% for the quarter, which fueled a good portion of our 14% growth in this segment.
Growth is widespread across all major products in our portfolio, and much of the rate continues to be driven by excess liability products, particularly commercial and management liability coverages.
Our transportation business continues to bounce back with increased bookings in public auto, but is still challenged by driver shortages.
Overall, wheels-based rates continue to be up, but rate increases are more moderate in size.

Despite the overall growth in the transportation space, we still find the trucking class to be increasingly competitive as top line and rates decreased for the quarter.
Claim counts continue to climb to previous levels, and more jury trials are being scheduled.
We will remain vigilant for social inflation and work to mitigate it through our investment in superior talent, training and triaging of claims.
In property, we reported a combined ratio of 127 for the quarter and 105 year-to-date.

The excess and surplus lines wind product is the driver of the unprofitable results.
Hurricane Ida was one of the most intense and damaging hurricanes to strike the United States in recorded history.
From day 1, we have had our teams on the ground, assessing losses and helping our customers get back in the business.
About 90% of our claims reported have been in the state of Louisiana as the New Orleans metro area is one of our peak zones for wind exposure.
The event, along with general market conditions and expected inflation, have kept cat rates up double digits for the eighth consecutive quarter.
Overall, top line growth was 32% for the property segment in the quarter, driven by exposures and a 7% segment rate increase.
All products in this segment realized growth.
In surety, we report a 75% combined ratio for the quarter.
All three of our major products in this segment have grown profitably.
Overall, our top line grew 10% in the quarter.
Despite economic challenges, both the commercial and contract surety markets remain very competitive.

We are back visiting producers in person and continue to invest in capabilities that make it easy to do business and help our producers grow with us.
There are more construction opportunities in the market, and we are supporting our contractors as they win this business.
We will continue to expand our writings with existing clients and producers and invest in technology where it is a differentiator.
We had a quiet quarter on the claim front despite the added risk from supply chain and labor issues.
Overall, another profitable quarter with solid growth.
Our underwriting experts are ready to participate where disruption and market pricing permit us to flex our underwriting prowess at rates that are commensurate with the risk.
As always, we are alert to the uncertainty associated with inflation and supply chain disruption.

We will continue to do what we do best: focus on the basics.
We will diligently underwrite quality accounts, assess evolving exposures, require adequate valuation of insured property and walk away from underpriced business.
We are good stewards of our capital, but also of our insured's risk and reputation.
I want to thank our RLI associates for delivering great results and value to all of our stakeholders and for helping our customers, especially in times of need.

I'd now like to open it up for questions.





