Speaker :: Scott Gammill -- Investor Relations Director


Thank you, Pema.
Good afternoon, and welcome to Southern Company's Year-end 2020 Earnings Call.
Joining me today are Tom Fanning, Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer of Southern Company; and Drew Evans, Chief Financial Officer.
Let me remind you we'll be making forward-looking statements today in addition to providing historical information.
Various important factors could cause actual results to differ materially from those indicated in the forward-looking statements, including those discussed in our Form 10-K and subsequent filings.
In addition, we will present non-GAAP financial information on this call.
Reconciliations to the applicable GAAP measures are included in the financial information we released this morning as well as the slides for this conference call, which are both available on our Investor Relations website at investor.
southerncompany.com.
At this time, I'll turn the call over to Tom Fanning.





Speaker :: Thomas A. Fanning -- Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer


Good afternoon, and thank you all for joining us.
As you can see from the materials we released this morning, we reported strong adjusted earnings per share for 2020 that exceeded our guidance range.
In addition, we have a solid outlook for 2021, and importantly, we are raising our projected long-term earnings-per-share growth rate.
But before we turn to more on our year-end business update, I'd like to share some thoughts on 2020.
In 2020, we essentially saw four pandemics: health, economic, social and political.
Southern Company demonstrated excellence and resilience on every front, including prioritizing the health and safety of our workforce and communities, overcoming decreased electric demand while delivering both strong financial and superior operating results and continuing to address racial injustice and working with policymakers to advance a cleaner energy future.

First, the health pandemic.
The COVID-19 pandemic was, of course, the first and primary challenge that we faced last year and one that continues to impact our communities today.
From developing a pandemic response reentry playbook that was ultimately leveraged by many peer companies, to standing up a medical village at the Vogtle construction site and making heroic progress toward completion of those units, we placed the health and safety of our employees as a top priority.
So by taking care of our workforce, we were able to continue taking care of our customers.
The economic pandemic.
Beginning in March and April of last year, the world has experienced significant economic duress.
Southern Company originally projected a $250 million to $400 million loss in revenue as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Through thoughtful, disciplined O&M reductions, we were able to mitigate the estimated now $300 million revenue loss that we have experienced while still providing reliability and industry-leading customer satisfaction to our customers.
As well, our long-term efforts with the states that we serve on economic development efforts continue, helping capital investment and job growth in the communities we're privileged to serve.

The social pandemic.
I am also proud of our ongoing commitment to foster racial justice.
For years, this has been an effort of Southern's to focus on building a healthy culture.
Even before the unrest last summer, we initiated an effort to donate $50 million to historically black colleges and universities.
Last summer, I told you that meaningful discussions were under way across our company related to our actions and response.
And while these conversations will continue, an initial outcome is that we have refocused our efforts toward a more holistic goal of diversity, equity and inclusion, ensuring that all groups are welcomed, well represented, engaged and fairly treated throughout the organization.
As an example of this commitment, the Southern Company Foundation recently announced a partnership with Apple, where each are investing $25 million to launch the Propel Center, a new digital learning hub, business incubator and global innovation headquarters located in Atlanta for students throughout the nation of historically black colleges and universities.
And finally, the political pandemic.
I also want to address the political discord that our nation has experienced over the past several months.
At Southern, we have consistently prioritized working with policymakers regardless of political party, and we have been working constructively with the Biden administration for months.
In fact, we have already engaged in matters related to energy policy, especially the transition to a net zero carbon future as well as on matters related to national security.

You'll see in the appendix a letter I sent to President-elect Biden pledging our support.
As we continue to engage with the new administration as well as legislators and regulators at both federal and state levels, our positions will continue to focus on energy policies that can enable a smart transition and be informed by our key objectives of providing clean, safe, reliable and affordable energy to our customers.
So let's now turn to an update on plant Vogtle units three and four We remain focused on meeting the November 2021 and November 2022 regulatory-approved in-service dates for units three and four respectively.
With the start of hot functional testing expected in only a few weeks, we now expect a November completion for Unit three.

For Unit four, we continue to utilize an aggressive site work plan as a tool to provide margin to the regulatory-approved November 2022 in-service date.
Unit 4's current site work plan targets a third quarter 2022 in-service date.
From a cost perspective, Georgia Power's share of the total project capital cost forecast increased by $176 million, largely reflecting estimated COVID-19 impact and other costs, along with a replenishment of contingency to fund future expected risks that will include lower productivity rates and increased support costs.
As a result, Georgia Power recorded an after-tax charge of $131 million during the fourth quarter.
2020 marked another year of significant progress at the site.
Throughout the year, as some other major projects around the country were shutting down or delayed due to COVID-19, Georgia Power and the Vogtle site team worked tirelessly to implement measures to keep the project progressing while prioritizing the safety of our workforce and the surrounding community.
Similar to what was experienced across much of the United States during the last two months of the year and earlier this year, we saw a surge in COVID-19 cases at the Vogtle site, which, as you can see on slide six, peaked around the beginning of January.
Since the onset of the pandemic and most acutely during the fourth quarter of 2020, the impacts from COVID-19 have included high absenteeism and disruptions to planned or ongoing work as we isolated personnel.

We estimate the pandemic has extended the schedule for both units by approximately three to four months, consuming much of the remaining margin to the November 2021 in-service date for Unit three and several months of margin for Unit four.
Unit three direct construction is now approximately 98% complete, and hot functional testing is expected to start in the coming weeks.
On our last call, we identified three key risk factors to our time line: electrical productivity, subcontractor performance and what we call paper closure.
Recall, paper closure relates to the turnover of systems to the testing group to help ensure that the as-built condition of the plant meets design specifications.
Over the past few months, COVID-19 has hurt site productivity, negatively impacted electrical production and impaired our ability to close paper issues that facilitate timely system turnovers and, ultimately, ITAAC submittals.
The combination of these factors has delayed system turnovers and impacted our time line for the start of hot functional testing.
Based on our recent production trends, we now expect to start hot functional testing during the second half of March and start loading fuel during July.
Starting hot functional testing and fuel load on this time line would support a November 2021 in-service date with up to one month of flexibility remaining in the schedule.
Now certainly, risks remain to this schedule.

These risks may be thought of in four segments: first, the completion of system turnovers leading up to hot functional testing; second, the successful completion of hot functional testing; third, the completion of system turnovers leading to fuel load; and fourth, an orderly transition from fuel load to an efficient start-up of the unit.
Successful completion of hot functional testing this spring would significantly decrease the remaining operational risk to Unit three completion, although certainly, challenges and risks will remain in focus as we focus to fuel load.
ITAAC submittal and review is expected to continue to accelerate and will remain an area of focus.
To date, 180 ITAAC have been submitted to the NRC.
We expect approximately 20 additional ITAAC to be submitted by the start of hot functional testing and the remaining 200 to be submitted during hot functional testing and as we approach fuel load.
Direct construction for Unit four is now over 75% complete.
Last month, we started and integrated flush, and we expect initial energization to occur during March.

To support the November benchmark, we will need to average construction completion of approximately 1.5% per month, which is in line with the average rate achieved during the period from last November through January.
As we progress in 2021, construction and production is expected to increase in support of our upcoming testing milestones.
And importantly, as Unit three nears hot functional testing, we expect to shift additional resources to unit four to increase our current pace of construction completion.
Now turning to cost.
During the fourth quarter, Georgia Power allocated its remaining contingency plus an additional $5 million and subsequently added new contingency of approximately $171 million to support completion of the project.

We estimate the pandemic has extended the schedule for both units by approximately three to four months at an estimated cost to Georgia Power of between $150 million and $190 million.
This cost is embedded in our updated total project cost estimate.
While COVID-19-related impacts were significant drivers of the change of our capital cost forecast, future risks, including construction productivity, were contributing factors.
Earlier this week, the Georgia Public Service Commission unanimously approved VCM 23, which included project capital costs through June 30, 2020.
As a part of the order, Georgia Power was directed to work with the PSC staff to develop a mutually agreeable recommendation to the commission by the end of March regarding the process, timing and substance of filings related to the transition of Unit three costs into base rates.
Additionally, Georgia Power files VCM 24 today.
The months ahead represent a critical and exciting time for Vogtle.
The project team has worked tirelessly amid conditions none of us could have imagined just a year ago.
Our employees, contractors, co-owners and community partners should be commended for their perseverance and dedication to the completion of this important project.

Drew, I'll turn it over to you now for an update of the financials and our outlook.





Speaker :: Drew Evans -- Chief Financial Officer


Thanks, Tom, and good afternoon, everyone.
I hope you are all safe and healthy.
As Tom mentioned, we had a very strong year in 2020 despite the many challenges we faced.
For the full year, our adjusted earnings per share was $3.25, $0.14 higher than last year and $0.03 above the top of our guidance range.
2020 was certainly defined by milder weather and sales impacts due to COVID-19, and we were able to substantially overcome both, as evidenced in our solid results.
Looking at the details.
Retail electric sales on a weather-normalized basis were down by $0.14 year-over-year, including impacts related to COVID-19, offset by customer growth.
Milder temperatures throughout 2020 resulted in an additional $0.21 negative earnings per share variance as compared to the prior year.
We substantially mitigated both weather and COVID-19 impacts through thoughtful, disciplined O&M reductions as well as continued investment at our state-regulated utilities.

On a combined basis, these factors allowed us to exceed our adjusted EPS guidance for the year.
A detailed reconciliation of our reported and adjusted results as compared to 2019 is included in today's release and earnings package.
COVID-19 impacts reduced our projected weather normal kilowatt hour sales by 3% for the year.
The slight uplift from the residential sector persisted throughout 2020 with more people working from home.
In the fourth quarter, we continued to see improvement in kilowatt hour sales for both the commercial and industrial customer classes.
However, we do not believe we have seen a full recovery in these sectors yet.
Factoring in impacts across all customer classes, our nonfuel revenues declined by approximately $300 million, which was at the lower end of our original estimates as the pandemic began.

As Tom mentioned, an important part of our COVID-19 response was, and continues to be, supporting our customers.
We have worked closely with customers across our regulated utilities, offering special payment plans for those with past due account balances and have delayed disconnects.
You can see the impact of our COVID-19-related protocols for disconnects in our customer counts for the year.
Last year, our state-regulated utilities added just over 53,000 new residential electric customers and nearly 30,000 residential natural gas customers.
Our electric customer growth was approximately 30% higher than our expectations.
Overall, we estimate that about 80% of the residential electric customer growth in 2020 was due to continued and accelerating in migration to the region, particularly in Georgia.

The remainder is likely related to the steps we have taken to keep customers connected during the pandemic, particularly through the use of extended payment plans.
During this time, customer arrears have tended better than we anticipated across our operating companies.
We also have constructive mechanisms approved by the commissions in many of our states, allowing us to address incremental COVID-19-related costs, including bad debt expense.
Those will be considered in future regulatory proceedings.
In a trend that differentiates our service territory, the pandemic has strengthened population and job growth in the Southeast, particularly in Georgia, which is one of the fastest-growing states in the United States.
Robust economic development in the Southeast region is also a positive indicator that our key states are weathering the pandemic relatively well.
In 2020, we saw new investment of nearly $6 billion and nearly 25,000 jobs created across Georgia and Alabama.
In fact, Georgia was the number two state in the country for job creation in December.
And just last week, Microsoft confirmed Atlanta as a major East Coast hub, which is expected to bring significant job growth and investment.

Our state-regulated operating companies play an integral role in leading economic development efforts in each of their states.
Turning now to our expectation for 2021.
Our guidance range for the year is $3.25 to $3.35 per share.
In the first quarter of 2021, we expect -- we estimate that we will earn $0.84 per share.
Included in our full year guidance is an assumption that we will see modest impacts -- continue to see modest impacts on retail sales from COVID-19, which we expect to continue to mitigate through thoughtful cost control.
Additionally, we expect total retail sales growth normalized for any short-term COVID-19 impact to be flat to 1%.
For this foreseeable future, this expected growth rate is driven by a combination of customer growth and ongoing improvements in energy efficiency.
Moving now to our outlook for long-term growth.
We see our long-term EPS growth rate in the 5% to 7% range, consistent with adjusted earnings in the range of $4 to $4.30 per share by 2024.
With 90% of total projected earnings over the five year plan horizon coming from our state-regulated utilities, our expected EPS trajectory has a solid foundation.

Likewise, our history of constructive regulation, stable credit metrics and ongoing focus on cost control serve to underscore the achievability of our plan.
Looking more closely at our long-term capital investment plan, we continue to allocate 95% of our capital investment to our state-regulated utilities.
Our capital investment plan of $40 billion for 2021 through 2025 includes annual projected rate base growth at our state-regulated utilities of greater than 5%, with a continued emphasis on transmission, transportation and distribution, modernization and resilience.
For Southern Power, the cumulative five year investment plan is comprised entirely of previously approved renewables projects and maintenance capital for the existing generation fleet, which is over 90% contracted for the next 10 years.
Any incremental growth opportunities at Southern Power are expected to enhance the long-term financial plan and be largely self-funded and credit-neutral.
Importantly, this capex projection for the whole company does not include amounts for accelerated fleet transition and any associated transmission growth, nor does it account for new generation projects at Southern Power.

We will be evaluating a number of paths over the next few years as it relates to the fleet transition, but we do not establish placeholders in our plan with virtually all projects being known in the process of or having already been engineered or have already begun.
Taking a look at the balance sheet, we currently forecast no equity needs over our 5-year plan horizon, even when considering the potential increase in capital investment I just described.
We believe we are well positioned to further strengthen our balance sheet and to improve our credit metrics materially during this time.
I'll highlight that, in January, we became the first large cap utility in the U.S. to publish a sustainable financing framework, and the days that followed, Southern Power issued a 5-year green bond under that framework that resulted in a record low coupon rate.
This framework highlights Southern's ongoing commitment to a wide range of sustainability and social issues and should allow us to leverage our work in these areas to help optimize our balance sheet and benefit our customers.

We will also continue our focus on societal priorities in the upcoming years.
Before I turn it back to Tom, I'd like to echo his opening remarks.
The resilience of our business has demonstrated amid the pandemic is a testament to the hard work our employees put forth every -- each and every day.
The ability of our employees to continually provide outstanding service to our customers, combined with the support of our communities and the constructive relationships we maintain with regulators and public officials, underpin our ability to also deliver such solid performance.
I would like to particularly thank the people who work for, and on behalf of the customer -- our customers to meet our priorities, even in light of a global pandemic.

We are all grateful.
Thank you.
Tom, I'll turn it back over to you.





Speaker :: Thomas A. Fanning -- Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Drew.
I'd like to circle back to your comments on fleet transition.
Southern has two primary goals related to our greenhouse gas emissions.
The first is to achieve zero -- net zero emissions by 2050.
We will work constructively with the Biden administration to accelerate this time frame as national policy evolves.
The second one is to put in place an interim milestone to achieve a 50% reduction in greenhouse gases by 2030.
Regarding the intermediate goal, we achieved our 2030 goal in 2020 with preliminary greenhouse gas emissions now down 52%.
Now certainly, 2020 was an unusual year, and we may see emissions reductions move around 50% for the next two years, but we believe we'll be sustainably above our 50% reduction level by 2023.
While ESG issues have received increasing attention by investors over the past few years, at Southern Company, these issues have consistently received the heightened attention they deserve, and it's being recognized.
We were once again ranked as one of the world's most admired companies by Fortune Magazine.
Diversity Inc. rated us as a top company for ESG.
And for the fifth consecutive year, we've received a perfect Corporate Equality Index score by the Human Rights Campaign.

In addition, we're very proud of the A- rating we recently received from the Carbon Disclosure Project for our environmental transparency and leadership.
We recognize the value our investors and stakeholders place on transparency, and we are committed to continued enhancements.
Now before closing, I want to just take a moment to recognize our leadership transition announcement that we made at the end of last year.
My trusted friend and one of my closest confidantes, Mark Lantrip, plans to retire in April after dedicating 40 years to Southern Company.
Mark has helped position Southern Company as a leader that is building and shaping the future of energy.

We are grateful for the many contributions Mark has made to our business, and we'll miss him dearly and wish him all the best.
Mark is passing the baton to Chris Kaminski, who has been a valued member of the southern company leadership team for many years, holding key positions at both Georgia Power and Southern Power.
In closing, over the past decade that I have been privileged to serve as CEO of Southern Company, I can think of no other year that I've been prouder of the way we've conducted ourselves and managed our business.
Our engagement with and [Indecipherable] for our employees, customers and communities in 2020 demonstrates our enduring commitment to be a citizen wherever we serve.
Thank you for joining us this afternoon.
Operator, we are now ready to take questions.





