Speaker :: Jeff Holy -- Vice President & Treasurer


Thank you.
Good morning, everyone, and welcome to the Westlake Chemical Corporation Third Quarter 2021 Conference Call.
I'm joined today by Albert Chao, our President and CEO; Steve Bender, our Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer; and other members of our management team.
The conference call agenda will begin with Albert, who will open with a few comments regarding Westlake's performance and a current perspective on the industry.
Steve will then provide a more detailed look at our financial and operating results.

Finally, Albert will add a few concluding comments, and we'll open the call up to questions.
During this call, we refer to ourselves as Westlake Chemical.
Any reference to Westlake Partners is to the master limited partnership, Westlake Chemical Partners LP, and similar references to OpCo refer to our subsidiary, Westlake Chemical OpCo LP, which owns certain olefins facilities.
Today, management is going to discuss certain topics that will contain forward-looking information that is based on management's beliefs as well as assumptions made by and information currently available to management.

These forward-looking statements suggest predictions or expectations and thus are subject to risks or uncertainties.
Actual results could differ materially based upon many factors, including the cyclical nature of the industries in which we compete; availability, cost and volatility of raw materials, energy and utilities; governmental regulatory actions, changes in trade policy and political unrest; global economic conditions, including the impact of the coronavirus; industry production capacity and operating rates; impacts of extreme weather events; the supply demand balance for Westlake's products; competitive products and pricing pressures; access to capital markets; technological developments; and other risk factors as discussed in our SEC filings.

This morning, Westlake issued a press release with details of our third quarter results.
This document is available in the Press Release section of our web page at westlake.com.
We have also posted a presentation on our website to review the third quarter.
A replay of today's call will be available beginning today, two hours following the conclusion of this call.
This replay may be accessed by dialing the following numbers: domestic callers should dial (855) 859-2056.

International callers may access the replay at (404) 537-3406.
The access code for both numbers is 2495584.
Please note that information reported on this call speaks only as of today, November 2, 2021, and therefore, you are advised that time-sensitive information may no longer be accurate as of the time of any replay.
I would finally advise you that this conference call is being broadcast live through an Internet webcast system that can be accessed on our web page at westlake.com.

Now I would like to turn the call over to Albert Chao.
Albert?





Speaker :: Albert Chao -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Thank you, Jeff.
Good morning, everyone.
We appreciate you joining us to discuss our record quarterly results.
In this morning's press release, for the third quarter of 2021, we reported another quarter of record net income of $607 million or $4.69 per diluted share as well as quarterly records for net sales, operating income and EBITDA.
Net income for the quarter increased $550 million from the third quarter of 2020, reflecting the continued strong demand for most of our products driving a strong pricing environment.
I'm very proud of the Westlake team for delivering these results despite the impact from Hurricane Ida on the operations in the third quarter as well as global supply chain constraints on our building products business.
Strong demand dynamics in PVC, caustic soda and polyethylene created a healthy pricing dynamic, which contributed to our expanding margins.

The strong and broad market momentum in global construction driven by tight supply demand balances across our key products drove higher earned pricing and strong margins year-over-year in both our Vinyls and building products businesses.
Our olefins segment benefited from a continuation of strong margins and solid volume gains year-over-year as the polyethylene industry experienced robust global consumer packaging product demand and tight inventories.
This momentum in margins also continued from the second quarter into the third quarter in spite of a planned maintenance outage.

The strong long-term prospects of the U.S. housing market and favorable demographics supporting continued housing growth, along with broad demand in U.S. repair and remodeling expenditures, provide for the compelling growth opportunities in our building products business.
Our recently completed acquisitions in building products greatly expands our product offering with leading brands to meet these market opportunities.
In August, we completed the acquisition of LASCO Fittings, a leading manufacturer of injection-molded PVC pipe fittings.

LASCO brings additional markets serving the plumbing, pool and spa, industrial, irrigation and retail markets in North America, and is complementary to our existing product portfolio of PVC pipe and larger-diameter fittings.
In September, we acquired Dimex, one of the largest processor of post-industrial recycled plastic material in the U.S.
This acquisition further expands Westlake's product portfolio to include a variety of consumer products made from processed post-industrial recycled PVC, polyethylene and thermoplastics elastomer, and sells these consumer products throughout the nation in big-box home improvement retailers and online through nationally known e-commerce platforms.

In October, we completed the acquisition of Boral, North America's building products business.
This acquisition places Westlake into industry-leading positions, serving the housing market in concrete and clay roofing, premium siding treatment shutters, decorative stone and vinyl windows.
These transactions transform our existing building products business into new strategic product platforms, which offer market-innovative, leading brands of exterior building products designed to enhance customer satisfaction.
These products improve the energy efficiency, durability and value in residential housing, schools, hospitals and other buildings.

We are pleased to welcome our new fellow employees from Boral, Dimex and LASCO to Westlake.
These transactions are transformative and bring significant value benefits to Westlake through their attractive financial attributes and market-leading product platforms serving the housing markets.
The acquisition of Dimex introduces recycled plastic products that serve the consumer markets.
Approximately 50% of our building products business is oriented to the repair and remodeling markets, which have proven to be more stable and predictable over the long term.

These newly acquired products and brands when compared with Westlake's existing leading positions in PVC siding, treatment molding, compounds, PVC pipe and fittings, now provide our residential customers with a comprehensive portfolio of products and solutions, which enhance the everyday lives of countless individuals.
We continue to look for opportunities to expand our business while driving value for our shareholders.
Westlake has made significant progress in our strategic growth plans this year.
And with a strong demand picture and leading positions in building products, PVC, caustic soda and polyethylene, we believe our businesses are very well positioned going forward.

I would now like to turn our call over to Steve to provide more detail on our financial and operating results for the third quarter.





Speaker :: M. Steven Bender -- Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer


Thank you, Albert, and good morning, everyone.
In the third quarter, Westlake benefited from the continuing global economic expansion, resulting in healthy demand with leading market positions for our products, resulting in our record performance.
This quarter, we reported quarterly net income of $607 million, which is a record for Westlake.
In addition, for the third quarter of 2021, we reported record income from operations of $861 million and record EBITDA of $1.1 billion.
Third quarter's year-over-year $550 million increase in net income is a result of significantly higher sales prices and margins for most of our major products.

Third quarter 2021 net income increased by $85 million from second quarter 2021 net income of $522 million.
The increase in net income was largely attributable to higher sales prices and higher margins in PVC and polyethylene as well as improving caustic pricing.
Our building products business, we continue to experience strong results as North American housing demand remained robust, while the supply of building products inventories remain tight.
Sales volumes in our Vinyls and Olefins segments in the third quarter were lower, reflecting weather-related impacts, planned maintenance and logistics constraints.

Our utilization of the FIFO method of accounting resulted in a $30 million benefit compared to what earnings would have been if reported on the LIFO method.
This is only an estimate and has not been audited.
Let me provide some details on our segments, starting with our Vinyls segment.
As the second largest global producer of PVC and the second largest global producer of caustic soda when combined, Westlake is the world leader in core vinyls markets.
The leading position with strong market fundamentals in PVC and caustic soda enabled us to deliver strong results the quarter.

The solid demand for PVC was anchored by robust year-over-year global demand growth and solid strong PVC end markets using -- including construction and home remodeling.
Our building products business continue to benefit from healthy North American residential construction and repair and remodeling demand.
These factors drove higher PVC sales prices in the segment, and we benefit from strong integrated margins during the quarter.
For the third quarter of 2021, Vinyls segment operating income was a record $601 million, increasing $559 million from the prior year period due to significantly higher sales prices and margins, as well as increased earnings in our building products business.

Driven by higher sales prices across our major products, Vinyls operating income in the third quarter increased $166 million over our second quarter 2021 results.
These increases were partially offset by lower volumes resulting from weather-related outages.
In our Olefins business, the continuing robust global demand for consumer product packaging drove polyethylene prices higher in the third quarter and expanded our margins.
Olefins third quarter 2021 operating income of $281 million increased $230 million from the third quarter of 2020 as a result of strong pricing and expansion of margins.

For the third quarter of 2021, Olefins operating income increased $4 million from the second quarter of 2021 primarily due to higher sales prices and margins, while volumes were impacted by planned maintenance events.
Next, let's turn attention to the balance sheet and statement of cash flows.
We generated $755 million in cash flows from operations in the third quarter 2021.
Third quarter 2021 capital expenditures were $144 million.
Our solid balance sheet and our commitment to keeping our strong investment-grade financial metrics provided us the ability to raise $1.7 billion in the third quarter at an average maturity of 26 years with an average coupon of 2.7%.

A portion of these proceeds were used to fund our acquisitions in the second half of this year.
We continue to maintain our long-dated debt maturity profile with a weighted average debt maturity of 17 years while keeping strong credit metrics, anchoring our investment-grade balance sheet.
Now to address some of your modeling questions.
We entered the third quarter experiencing higher raw material and energy cost, which could persist through the fourth quarter.
We expect our effective tax rate for the full year of 2021 to be approximately 23% and a cash tax rate of 21%.
Our capital expenditures forecast for the year is now expected to be between $600 million and $650 million.
The turnaround of our Petro two ethylene unit is currently underway and expected to be completed in December.

With that, I'll now turn the call back over to Albert to make some closing comments.
Albert?





Speaker :: Albert Chao -- President and Chief Executive Officer


Thank you, Steve.
This quarter's record highlights the earnings power of our products and our high level of integration, which extends through the value chain from natural gas liquids and other fixed stuff through to consumer building products.
We are very excited about the new products and brands that Boral, LASCO and Dimex bring to Westlake.
These leading products and brands will continue to drive our earnings power.
As we look forward, with global supply chains and manufacturing beginning to normalize, we are well situated to continue to meet the global strong demand for consumer and industrial products.

As the U.S. continues to have globally advantaged feedstock and energy positions with ethane natural gas versus high-priced oil-based feedstock utilized by our foreign competitors.
We see PVC supply demand dynamics remain favorable with a strong growth in demand more than offsetting the limited global capacity additions.
We see continued strength in our PVC and chlor-alkali business, with healthy demand in caustic soda and chlorine.
The strength in global construction and in manufacturing outlook should also be supportive of strength in the downstream building products business.

In our Olefins business, demand remains favorable as essential everyday products such as consumer packaging and healthcare drive polyethylene volumes.
However, there are global capacity additions in coming quarters.
The strategic acquisitions of both North America, LASCO and Dimex expands our building product platform to significantly leverage our participation in a strong housing and repair and remodeling markets.
The proposed U.S. infrastructure spending bill would significantly benefit our other building products business and drive construction demand for many years.

Our ongoing growth initiatives in chemicals and building products are driving new and complementary products to our existing portfolio, which, when coupled with strong market growth, will deliver long-term value for our shareholders.
We will continue to look at opportunities that both further our strategy of adding complementary products as well as increasing our vertical product and sale channel capabilities in all of our business segments to deliver strong financial performance.

Our continued focus on ESG activities led us to make significant improvements in our operation and supply chain process for the betterment of our communities and where our products serve vital and valuable purposes.
We are also developing products to build a more sustainable future.
As part of our green initiatives, including introduction of a green caustic soda, known as GreenVin.
In Canada, we have commercialized and now selling our PVC-oriented pipe, referred to as PVC-O which allows us to create a PVC pipe that uses less material while delivering the enhanced strength and capabilities of our current PVC pipes.

In addition to these new products and dose of Dimex, which are derived from post-industrial recycled plastic, we expect to continue to bring back -- to bring to market products that will further our sustainability goals while meeting the needs of our customers and delivering value to our shareholders.
In September, we published our 2020 Sustainability Report, and among many accomplishments we noted that we have achieved meaningful annual improvements in our carbon footprint over the past five years.
This has been accomplished through applying technology and optimizing operations, resulting in our CO2 emissions falling by 8.7% from 2016 to 2020, and have ongoing efforts to continue to decrease our emissions.

We are confident that Westlake is well positioned to serve the growing worldwide needs of our customers while maintaining financial discipline, which combined with the strong fundamentals of our business, enables us to deliver long-term value to our shareholders.
Before I conclude, I want to take a moment to mention that in September, we celebrated our 35-year anniversary.
We have grown significantly since 1986, and I want to thank all of the Westlake employees who made this possible.
Thank you very much for listening to our third quarter earnings call.

I will now turn the call back over to Jeff.





Speaker :: Jeff Holy -- Vice President & Treasurer


Thank you, Albert.
Before we begin taking questions, I would like to remind you that a replay of this teleconference will be available two hours after the call has ended.
We will provide that number again at the end of the call.

Detemera, we'll now take questions.





