Speaker :: Brandon Day -- Investor Relations


Thank you, Keith.
Good morning, everyone.
This is Brandon Day, Whiting's investor relations manager.
Thank you for joining us to discuss Whiting's fourth-quarter results for the period ended December 31, 2020.

With me today is Whiting's CEO, Lynn Peterson.
Also available to answer questions during the Q&A session will be our CFO, Jimmy Henderson; COO, Chip Rimer; and VP of commercial, Jo Ann Stockton.
Please be advised that our remarks today, including answers to your questions, include forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act.
These forward-looking statements are subject to risks and uncertainties that could cause actual results to materially different from those currently anticipated.



Those include risks relating to commodity prices, competition, technology, environmental and regulatory compliance, midstream availability and others described in our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, which are incorporated by reference.
We disclaim any obligation to update these forward-looking statements.
In addition, we may provide certain non-GAAP financial information in this call.
The relevant definitions and GAAP reconciliations may be found in our earnings release and 10-K, which can be found on our website at whiting.com in the investor relations section.

Following the prepared remarks, time permitting, we'll open the call to your questions.
I would like to remind everyone that a replay of this audio webcast will be available via the company's investor relations page at www.
whiting.com.
I'd now like to turn the call over to the CEO of Whiting Petroleum, Mr. Lynn Peterson.





Speaker :: Lynn Peterson -- Chief Executive Officer


Thanks, Brandon.
Good morning, everyone and thanks for joining us today.
I hope everyone continues to stay safe and healthy.
We filed our 10-K yesterday, and you can refer to it for detailed information, so I hope to highlight some of the significant items.

Let me begin with a huge understatement.
That if nothing else, 2020 brought change and as we embark on a whole new year, the company is in excellent shape, both financially and operationally.
The Whiting team has done a wonderful job scrubbing and challenging every cost throughout the company.
We have reduced staffing, cut salaries to reflect the current state of the industry and forged a compensation plan for the executive team that more closely aligns with our shareholders as we look to reset the company.

Our results in the fourth quarter begin to reflect these efforts as shown by our free cash flow.
This call marks the end of the road for the year 2020, and now we can truly focus on a future for Whiting as we are all well positioned to take advantage of a solid asset base, a strong financial position and a team of talented employees.
Before getting into the financial and operating results, I would like to give a shout out to our staff for the safety record in 2020.
The company reported its lowest total recordable incident rate in the history of the company.

The company also exceeded the state of North Dakota's gas capture rate without any exemptions, and will continue to strive to improve in all areas.
Since many of the comparisons between 2020 and 2019 numbers are not meaningful due to the restructuring and curtailment of activity beginning in April of 2020, we will try to comment on the comparisons that are significant -- have significant implications moving forward.
Adjusted EBITDAX was $120 million for the quarter and $382 million for the year after adjusting for the nonrecurring items related to the restructuring and reorganization compared to $241 million and $979 million for the respective periods of 2019.
Despite the lower activity level and commodity price environment, the company generated nearly $90 million of free cash flow in the fourth quarter of 2020 compared to approximately $86 million in the same period of 2019.

The free cash flow generated since emerging from bankruptcy has gone toward paying down debt.
On September 1, 2020, the company emerged with $425 million drawn on its $750 million facility.
As of December 31, 2020, the company's debt was down to $334 million net of cash on hand, and is projected to be paid down to approximately $275 million as we exit February.
We would've paid down $150 million since September 1 and as we generate free cash flow, we'll continue to reduce our borrowings as that is part of our credit facility that was set up at emergence, and is our liquidity and dry powder as we think about future opportunities.

Our production for the quarter averaged 91,700 barrels of oil equivalent, of which 61% was crude oil.
The company's production continued to decline through the quarter and into the end of the year.
Our capital program and guidance is designed to essentially hold 2021 production flat from our December 31, 2020 exit rate, and we estimate full-year 2021 production to be in the range of 82,000 to 88,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day and oil to be in the range of 48,000 to 52,000 barrels of oil per day.
We spent $21 million on capital expenditures during the fourth quarter to bring five wells onto production and commenced completion operations on an additional six wells.

In 2021, we expect to spend $240 million at the midpoint of our capital expenditure guidance.
We currently have one drilling rig running in our Sanish Field in North Dakota and anticipate a second rig could be added in late 2021.
We also have one completion crew operating in the Foreman Butte area.
We plan on turning 56 wells to production in 2021, of which 13 are scheduled for the first quarter that were drilled and uncompleted wells as of year-end.

Lease operating expenses were $55 million or $6.57 per BOE for the fourth quarter.
The benefit of our cost-cutting measures, along with better-than-expected weather and extended ESP run times, positively impacted the quarter.
I will note that winter has since returned to North Dakota in early February, where temperatures have been below 0 for the most consecutive days since 1936, with temperatures frequently reaching negative 20 degrees Fahrenheit.
The operation team continues to perform well despite these harsh conditions, but we do expect operating cost to increase somewhat in the first quarter of 2021, as has been shown historically.

We anticipate an active workover program throughout the year to keep production flowing on our base portfolio of older wells.
Moving to some of the recent regulations of Federal Appeals Court ruling in January affirmed the district court's order to vacate the Dakota access pipeline easement and directed the court to prepare an EIS, of which was previously under way.
U.S. Army Core requested a two month continuance of the February 10 status conference ordered by the district court to allow additional time to brief the new administration and confirm where the pipeline will continue to operate while their environmental impact study takes place.

We have and will continue to secure alternative market arrangements to help mitigate the potential impact of an unfavorable outcome.
We continue to believe that even with this exposure, our 2021 average oil price differentials will be similar to what we experienced in the second half of 2020, both in average and variability.
There has been a focus on exposure to federal acreage as the Biden -- as part of the Biden administration.
We have very limited exposure in North Dakota and expect very minimal impacts to our future plans because of any potential restriction to be put in place.

To ensure our ability to fund our capex program and generate free cash flow, we have continued to layer on commodity price hedges.
As a reminder, under our credit facility, we are required to hedge certain minimum levels of our PDP production, and we have exceeded those levels for the coming year.
We currently have 70% of our total forecasted crude oil hedged in 2021 and 75% of our natural gas.
We have utilized a combination of fixed price swaps and collars, which are further detailed in our 10-K.

As we have guided previously, we believe we will generate over $150 million of free cash flow in 2021 at a $45 WTI crude oil price and a $2.50 NYMEX natural gas price.
As a rule of thumb, for every $1 move in WTI, we expect approximately $10 million change in cash flows, but this will be affected by hedging at varying price levels.
During 2020, we made a concerted effort to overhaul our internal reservoir engineering team as well as engaging Netherlands Tool & Associates as our third-party independent engineering firm.
Our estimated proved reserves were 260 million barrels of oil equivalent with a PV10 of $1.2 million at December 31, 2020 compared to 485 million barrels of oil equivalent in 2019.

The two most significant components of the reduction in the and reserves were pricing and activity level.
The pricing per barrel under SEC rules for December 31, 2020 was approximately $40 per barrel compared to December 31, 2019, which was approximately $56 per barrel or a total reduction of just over $16 per barrel.
Gas per Mcf decreased to $1.99 from $2.58 for the same two periods.
The reduction in the company's activity from early 2020 to late 2020 had a ripple effect throughout the -- through the inability to book proved undeveloped locations that fall outside the SEC five year rule, combined with a more conservative approach to PUD bookings going forward.

Interestingly, since we have experienced a significant change in WTI pricing over the last few months, we wanted to internally run our reserves at $50 per barrel and $3 natural gas to see the impact on our reserves.
This pricing increased our proved reserves by approximately 20% and doubled our PV10 values.
The commodity price increase also has a positive impact on our future drilling locations, expanding our economic drilling inventory to over six years modeling a two rig program.
We remain steadfast in our strategy of generating free cash flow, while mitigating the impact of production declines.

In the near-term and in accordance with our credit facility, we will use our free cash flow to continue paying down debt, to ensure continued liquidity.
Longer term, we will look to our options of returning capital to shareholders.
Lastly, one housekeeping item.
As you may have seen in the prerelease, we agreed to a settlement with a general unsecured claimant where we released approximately 949,000 shares from the bankruptcy settlement pool in exchange for a release of claims, which eliminates certain obligations in our Redtail project.

These shares have a lockup feature, preventing to sell more than 50% of the shares during any 30-day period.
After the settlement, our share count is approximately 39 million beginning in the first quarter of 2021.
With that, I'll turn it back to the operator and open it up for questions.





