At our off-campus apartment communities and those on-campus apartment communities that American Campus leases in the open market, on a monthly average basis for April, May and June, 93.7% of our residents made their rent payments.
For those that were not able to meet their financial obligations due to hardship, through our resident hardship program we provided nearly $9 million of direct financial relief to more than 6,500 of our residents and their parents.
We also provided an additional $15 million of financial relief to students and parents at our ACE on-campus communities where leasing administration, rent collections and residence life are administered by our university partners.
In addition, our waiving of fees associated with the payment and collection of rent resulted in more than $2 million of budgeted revenues not being collected during the quarter.
As the team will discuss, this $24 million in financial relief and the waiver of fee income makes up the large majority of our diminished revenue for the quarter.
As reported in the College -- in the Chronicle -- excuse me, as it reported in the Chronicle of Higher Education, at this time, 63 of our 68 universities served are conducting some component of in-person classes.
And it's worth noting, we also continue to have leasing activity of property serving the five universities that have announced predominantly online curriculum delivery, with our four same store properties at these schools being 90% leased and with potential no shows and request for reletting currently representing only 5% potential diminishment in occupancy.
Two, universities now having available data on how COVID impacts the 18 to 22-year-old student demographic and having an improved understanding of how modern apartment style student housing and in-suite bath residence halls facilitate a student's ability to sanitize their own living environment and to isolate in households of two to four residents in times of outbreak.
And four, the continued incremental improvement we see in our overall leasing data, coupled with well above normal velocity compared to the same period prior year with regard to traffic, applications, leases and renewals for the last three, 10 and 20 days at our open market properties as of July 17.
As you saw in last night's release, with a range of five to 11 weeks left before the commencement of classes, we are now 90% pre-leased for the upcoming academic year, only 340 basis points behind the prior year.
While the variance to prior year increased from the 230 basis points in our May 31 leasing update, it is worth noting that the variance to prior year at our open market leasing properties have decreased since that time.
And when you review page S8 in our supplemental, the three, 10 and 20-day velocity trends in traffic, applications, leases and renewals would suggest that variance to the prior year should continue to decrease for that core category of properties.
Thus far, throughout this lease-up, we have had 178 renewal skips, which is consistent with our historical levels.
As we have commented to the market over the years, we typically only lose a total of 35 basis points to 60 basis points of final occupancy, with that net loss always having been reflected in the final leasing statistics we report each year.
To be clear, our final fall lease-up occupancy average of 97.5% over the years has always been net of the impacts of the process as we just discussed.
We've also often commented over the years that we believe one of the reasons our fall occupancies typically exceed the industry average by 200 basis points is our diligent administration of this process versus our peers.
At our properties leased in the open market, we currently have a total of 72,009 leases for fall, with 28,057 being returning renewal residents that have already taken -- already have possession of their units and 43,952 being new incoming leases, with this latter category representing a greater no show risk.
In addition to our standard email protocols, which again were implemented earlier than usual this year, we, as of this date, have made a total of 64,029 phone calls and successfully have had direct in-person dialog with 68% of our new incoming leases and 20% of our returning renewals.
As of yesterday, July 20, we have identified 689 potential no shows as compared to 135 in the prior year.
With regard to relet request, we currently have 1,563 for the current year as opposed to 956 in the prior year.
The combined current year total potential no show relet at this time represents approximately 230 basis points of potential lost occupancy versus 110 basis points in the prior year.
As an example, last year, the 135 potential no shows as of July 20 hit a high of 446 on August 5 of last year.
Through our normal processes, we successfully managed the final impact to only 38 basis points of diminishment due to actual no shows and successful reletting.
Well, as of July 20, the combined no show and relet net variance to last year's is 1,161, representing 120 basis points of potential lost occupancy.
As we have discussed earlier in the summer, of the approximately 470,000 on-campus beds in the 68 owned markets we serve, over 180,000 of those beds are largely in older traditional residence halls with community bathrooms where as many as 20 to 40 students share common sinks, toilets and showers in small confined spaces, a less than ideal product with regard to consumer preference and the ability to control sanitization to minimize the spread of viruses.
With many universities looking to de-densify this product type by converting double bedrooms to singles, thus cutting in half the number of students sharing these common restroom and bathing facilities, the potential existed for on-campus capacity to be reduced by as much as 90,000 beds.
Based upon our tracking of these de-densification activities by the universities we serve, at this time, 48 of the 68 universities served are de-densifying their on-campus housing, resulting in a reduction of 45,800 on-campus beds.
In addition, a total of 50 of the 68 universities are taking an additional 9,735 on-campus beds offline to use as quarantine housing should a second wave of coronavirus occur, resulting in an actual total reduction of more than 55,500 beds on campus this fall.
As universities are in the final stages of administering these plans and given the fact that to date we have not yet seen a positive variance in velocity in the 48 markets where de-densification is occurring as compared to the 20 where it is not, we are hopeful that we have yet to see the additional off-campus demand that yet may occur.
With regard to on-campus densification impacting our own portfolio via compliance with any mandates covering on-campus university housing, we're pleased to report that we have only 1,061 beds impacted at this time, representing only 110 basis points of capacity lost to our portfolio's designed beds.
At this time, the 90.1% of leases in place are at an average rent of $807 per bed for a 1.6% increase over the prior year in place average rent.
This resulted in property same-store revenues decreasing by 14.2% which we were able to partially offset with savings and operating expenses of 5.7% for a combined NOI decrease of 20.9%.
Over 60% of our portfolio is garden style apartment or townhome units which typically feature exterior unit entries and by nature have less interior circulation and common area interaction.
The balance of our communities consist of 30% mid-rise products and 9% high-rise buildings that rely on the use of common elevator banks and single point entries which require additional mitigation.
The annual operation expense on these items is approximately $2.5 million to $3 million.
While the situation remains fluid, we will have 1,600 beds available in August, increasing to 2,600 beds in January 2021 ready to occupy DCP participants once the program recommences.
After discussions with the University, we anticipate that the project will open at 60% capacity and a single occupancy configuration for this fall.
With regards to USC Health Sciences phase two, we are currently 72% pre-leased and are working through continued leasing activity and the no show process for fall.
We have a strong pipeline of on-campus development of 10 projects in various levels of pre-development.
Within ACC's 68 markets, we are tracking 17,600 beds currently under construction for 2021, with a potential additional 1,200 beds planned, but not yet under construction, reflecting a decline of 14% to 20% in new supply off the current year's decline of 20%.
As we reported last night, total FFOM for the second quarter of 2020 was $50.9 million or $0.37 per fully diluted share.
While we cannot completely isolate every item related to the pandemic, we believe approximately $23 million to $24 million in FFOM was lost due to situations surrounding the pandemic this quarter.
Overall, owned property revenue was $32.4 million negatively impacted by COVID related rent relief, lost summer camp revenue, increased bad debt and waived fees and other items.
Somewhat offsetting the lost revenue, owned property operating expenses were $8 million lower than originally budgeted as we were able to reduce spend in each area except for the uncontrollables of insurance and property taxes.
As a result of the lower than originally budgeted property NOI, ground lease expense was approximately $500,000 less due to a reduction in outperformance rent being paid to our university ground lessor partners.
And joint venture partners' noncontrolling interest in earnings was approximately $1.2 million lower.
Additionally, third-party management fee income was approximately $1 million lower and FFOM contribution from our on-campus participating properties was also almost $800,000 lower due to universities refunding a portion of spring rents at properties in both of these business segments.
Lastly, we were able to create approximately $800,000 in G&A and third-party overhead expense savings relative to our original plan for the quarter.
We also have some additional anticipated refunds in our on-campus ACE portfolio for the remainder of the summer term, expected to be in the range of approximately $1.5 million to $2.5 million, which should still keep us within the originally communicated range of expected refunds.
And finally, with regards to other income, we continue to expect a little to no summer camp business, and we are continuing to waive late fees and convenience fees through the remainder of the current academic year, which, combined, is expected to result in the loss of $5 million to $6 million in other income in the third quarter.
These projects were expected to contribute a combined $4 million in development fee income in 2020.
We further improved the Company's balance sheet liquidity in June with a well-received 10 year $400 million bond offering, using the proceeds to reduce the outstanding balance on the Company's $1 billion revolving credit facility.
As of June 30, we had over $800 million of availability on our revolver, with no remaining debt maturities in 2020 and a manageable $167 million in secured mortgage debt maturing in 2021.
As detailed on page S15 of our earning supplemental, including all projects currently under development for delivery through 2023, we have only $279 million in remaining development capital needs.
As of June 30, the Company's debt to total asset value was 40.9% and net debt to EBITDA was 7.6 times.
Although our leverage ratios are temporarily elevated at this time relative to the targets we have historically communicated due to the short-term COVID related disruption discussed, we feel confident about the capital plan we continue to lay out on page S15, which will bring the Company's debt to total assets back into the mid-30% range and debt to EBITDA back to the high-5 times to low-6 times range.
