Steve has been with AES for 14 years and has served in a variety of roles, including as Chief Executive Officer of Fluence and most recently as Head of both Strategy and Financial Planning.
I am happy to report that we are making excellent progress on our strategic and financial goals, and remain on track to deliver on our 7% to 9% annualized growth in adjusted earnings per share and parent free cash flow through 2025.
We had a strong third quarter with adjusted earnings per share of $0.50, a 19% increase versus the same quarter last year.
We expect to deliver on our full year guidance, even with a $0.07 noncash impact from an updated accounting interpretation related to the equity units of a convert we issued earlier this year.
Since our last call in August, we have signed an additional 1.1 gigawatts of renewable PPAs, bringing our year-to-date total to four gigawatts.
Additionally, we are in very advanced discussions for another 850 megawatts of wind, solar and energy storage.
This represents the largest addition in our history and 66% more than in 2020.
With our pipeline of 38 gigawatts of potential projects, including 10 gigawatts that are ready to bid in the U.S., we are well positioned to capitalize on this substantial opportunity.
As such, almost 90% of our new business has been from bilateral negotiated contracts with corporate customers.
For example, in Brazil, we see demand for more than 25 gigawatts of renewables, providing a significant opportunity to earn mid- to high-teen returns in U.S. dollars, while at the same time, diversifying our Brazilian portfolio of mostly hydro generation.
To that end, for the first time ever in Brazil, we are in very advanced negotiations to design a 300-megawatt U.S. dollar-denominated contract with a large multinational corporation for 15 years.
Our backlog of 9.2 gigawatts is the largest ever with 60% in the U.S. These projects represent one of the main drivers for our growth through 2025 and beyond.
Furthermore, more than 80% of our adjusted pre-tax contribution is in U.S. dollars, insulating us from fluctuations in foreign currencies.
AES Next operates as a separate unit within AES where we develop and incubate new businesses, including a combination of strategic investments and internally developed businesses, representing approximately $50 million of gross capital annually.
Another example is 5B, a prefabricated solar solution company that has patented technology, allowing projects to be built in 1/3 of the time and on half as much land while being resistant to hurricane force winds.
In 2021, this drag on earnings is expected to be approximately $0.06 per share.
We assume these losses from AES Next in our 2021 guidance and our 7% to 9% annualized growth rate through 2025.
As you know, last week, Fluence, our energy storage joint venture with Siemens, which began as a small business within AES, became a publicly listed company with a current valuation of around $6 billion.
Similarly, early this year, another AES Next business, Uplight, received evaluation in a private transaction of $1.5 billion.
The value of our interest in these two businesses is now at least $2.5 billion or $3 per share compared to the book value of our investments of approximately $150 million.
I have been at AES for 14 years and feel very fortunate to work at a company that is transforming the electric sector so profoundly along so many talented people in finance and throughout the company.
In my previous role, I led corporate strategy and financial planning where we developed our plan to get to greater than 50% renewables at least 50% of our business in the U.S. and to reduce our coal share to less than 10% by 2025, all while growing the company 7% to 9%.
Before I dive into our financial performance, I want to discuss the adjustment to our accounting that we made this quarter relating to the treatment of the $1 billion in equity units we issued in the first quarter this year.
This adjustment results in an annual impact of roughly $0.07 this year and $0.09 in 2022 and 2023 using a full year of an additional 40 million shares.
Adjusted earnings per share was $0.50 for the quarter versus $0.42 for the comparable quarter last year.
This 19% increase was primarily driven by improvements in our operating businesses, new renewables and parent interest savings.
Third quarter results also reflect an approximate $0.03 quarter-to-date impact from the higher share count due to the inclusion of 40 million additional weighted average shares relating to the equity units that I just mentioned.
Adjusted pre-tax contribution, or PTC, was $428 million for the quarter, an increase of $97 million versus third quarter of 2020.
In the US and Utilities SBU, PTC increased $69 million as a result of our continued progress in growing our U.S. footprint.
In California, our 2.3 gigawatt Southland legacy portfolio demonstrated its critical importance by continuing to meet the state's pressing energy needs and its transition to a more sustainable carbon-free future.
To summarize our performance in the first three quarters of the year, we earned adjusted earnings per share of $1.07 versus $0.96 last year.
As I mentioned earlier, in terms of our full year guidance, we are incorporating the $0.07 per share noncash impact from the adjustment for the equity units issued earlier this year.
Prior to this adjustment, we had expected to be in the upper half of our 2021 adjusted earnings per share guidance range, but we now expect to come in at the lower end of the range of $1.50 to $1.58.
Beginning on the left hand of the slide and consistent with our prior disclosure, we expect approximately $2 billion of discretionary cash this year.
We remain confident in our parent free cash flow target midpoint of $800 million and the $100 million from the sale of Itabo, and we received the $1 billion of proceeds from the equity units issued in March.
The uses are largely unchanged from the last quarter with $450 million in returns to our shareholders this year, consisting of our common share dividend and the coupon on the equity units.
We also continue to expect almost $1.5 billion of investment in our subsidiaries, with about 60% going toward renewables globally.
Our investment program continues to be heavily weighted to the U.S. with approximately 70% targeted for our U.S. businesses.
We are increasing our target for science renewable PPAs from four gigawatts to five gigawatts and Fluence successfully completed its $6 billion IPO.
We remain committed to delivering on our strategic and financial goals, including our 7% to 9% annualized growth rate in earnings and cash flow, and will continue to create greater shareholder value by being the leading integrator of new technologies.
