Prior to reviewing our progress against our 2021 financial objectives, I wanted to take a moment to express my deep gratitude to our employees around the world, specifically for their continued dedication and support for all of Assurant stakeholders during my tenure as CEO and especially over the last 18 months of the pandemic.
We recently completed our 2021 CDP Climate Survey, our sixth annual scoring submission expanding this year to include Scope 3 greenhouse gas emissions across several categories.
During the quarter, Assurant was recognized as a 2021 honoree of The Civic 50 by Points of Light, thus claiming [Phonetic] Assurant as one of 50 most community-minded companies in the U.S.
Year-to-date, excluding reportable catastrophes, net operating income per share was $6.02, up 14% from the first half of last year and net operating income was $366 million, an increase of 30%.
Adjusted EBITDA increased 12% to $600 million.
These results support our full-year outlook of 10% to 14% growth in net operating income per share excluding affordable catastrophes.
From 2019 through June of this year, we've returned to shareholders over 88% or almost $1.2 billion of our three-year $1.35 billion objective.
In July, we repurchased an additional 737,000 shares for $150 million and declared our quarterly common stock dividend for the third quarter, essentially completing our objective when paid.
In addition to completing this objective, we expect to return $900 million in net proceeds from the sale of Global Preneed within the next 12 months and therefore expect buybacks to continue at a higher-than-usual level throughout the remainder of the year and into 2022.
Through his strategic vision and intense focus on the evolving needs of our clients and end consumers, Alan and our team have solidified market-leading positions in our Connected World and Specialty P&C businesses, help Assurant establish a strong growth capital-light service-oriented business model where our Connected World offering is now comprised approximately two-thirds of our segment earnings and ultimately work together to unlock the power of our Fortune 300 organization -- prioritizing resources against initiatives with the highest growth potential and standing of key enterprise capabilities and functions, which we can now leverage across our growing client and customer base.
Over the last few months, we have delivered several new partnerships and renewals throughout the enterprise including the renewal of two key European mobile clients representing 7,000 subscribers; renewal of eight global automotive partnerships representing over 10 million policies across our distribution channels; renewal of three Multifamily housing property management companies including two of the largest in the U.S. as we continue to grow the rollout of our Cover360 product; renewal of three clients and two new partnerships in lender-place as we provide critical support for the U.S. mortgage market.
In summary, I'm very excited to lead our 14,000 employees into the future and build on the tremendous momentum created under Alan's leadership.
For the quarter, we reported net operating income per share excluding reportable catastrophes of $2.99, up 12% from the prior year period.
Excluding cats, net operating income for the quarter totaled $184 million and adjusted EBITDA amounted to $298 million, a year-over-year increase of 12% and 10% respectively.
The segment reported net operating income of $124 million in the second quarter, a year-over-year increase of 2%.
In Global Automotive, earnings increased $7 million or 16% from continued strong year-over-year growth related to our U.S. clients across various distribution channels.
Results within auto also included a $4 million increase from the sale of the real estate joint venture partnership.
Connected Living earnings decreased by $9 million compared to a strong prior-year period.
For the quarter, Lifestyle's adjusted EBITDA increased 6% to $186 million.
As we look at revenues, Lifestyle increased by $169 million or 10%.
Within Global Automotive, revenue increased 13% reflecting strong prior period sales of vehicle service contracts.
This was reflected in our net written premiums of roughly $1.3 billion in the quarter, the highest quarter ever recorded.
Connected Living revenues were up 7% for the quarter.
For the full year, Lifestyle revenues are expected to increase modestly, compared to last year's $7.3 billion, mainly driven by year-to-date Global Auto and Connected Living growth.
This also reflects the reduction of 750,000 mobile subscribers related to a European banking program that moved to another provider in the second quarter.
For 2021, we still expect Global Lifestyle's net operating income to grow in the high-single digits compared to the $437 million reported in 2020.
Net operating income for the quarter totaled $94 million, compared to $85 million in the second quarter of 2020 due to $10 million of lower reportable catastrophes.
Investment income included a $4 million increase from the sale of a real estate joint venture referenced earlier.
Looking at loans track, the $1.5 million sequential loan decline was mainly attributable to a client portfolio that rolled off in the second quarter.
However, the decline in loans track should be partially offset by two new client partnerships in the quarter, which should enable us to onboard approximately 700,000 loans by year-end.
To mitigate multi-event risk, we added a flexible limit that can be used to reduce our retention from $80 million to $55 million in certain second and third events, or increase the top-of-the-tower $50 million in excess of $950 million in the rare case of a 1 in 174-year event.
We also increased our multi-year coverage to over 50% of our U.S. tower.
In terms of revenue, Global Housing's revenue increased 5%, primarily due to double-digit growth in Multifamily housing, as well as higher revenue in lender-placed including higher premium rates and average-insured values.
As a result of the strong first half, we now expect Global Housing's net operating income excluding cats to be flat compared to the $371 million in 2020.
At corporate, the net operating loss was $12 million, compared to $29 million in the second quarter of 2020.
This were driven by two items: first, lower employee-related expenses and third party fees, which we expect to increase in the second half of the year; and second, we had $6 million of favorable one-time items including a tax benefit and income from the sale of the real estate joint venture partnership.
For the full year of 2021, we now expect the Corporate net operating loss to be approximately $85 million.
This compares to our previous estimate of $90 million.
We ended the second quarter with $353 million, which is $128 million above our current minimum target level.
This excludes both the $1.2 billion in net proceeds from the sale of Preneed and the net proceeds from the second quarter debt offering, which were used for the July redemption of senior notes due in 2023.
In the second quarter, dividends from our operating segments totaled $243 million.
In addition to our quarterly corporate and interest expenses, we also had outflows from three main items: $191 million of share repurchases, $42 million in common stock dividends and $17 million mainly related to mobile acquisitions including Olivar and Assurant venture investments.
