Importantly, we continue to expect the propagation characteristics of the sub-6 gig frequencies, compared to traditionally deployed mobile spectrum to necessitate significant network densification over the long term supporting a multiyear period of strong growth on our tower sites.
Further, application volumes within our property business are strong, supported by expected wireless capex spend in the mid-$30 billion range this year.
Industry experts anticipate that these elevated levels of capital spending will be sustained for a number of years, driven by a mobile data usage growth CAGR of more than 25% over the next five years.
Amazingly, this follows a more than 25% CAGR for the last five years, and cumulative growth of approximately 7,500% over the last decade.
This compelling demand backdrop, coupled with the long-term noncancelable leases that comprise our more than $60 billion global contractual backlog, gives us confidence in our ability to drive organic tenant billings growth in the mid-single-digit range on average in the U.S. through 2027, and to drive higher growth rates abroad in that same period.
Across Germany, Spain, and France, where 5G mobile subscriptions currently make up less than 5% of the total user base, we expect mobile data usage per smartphone to grow by more than 25% annually for the next five years, similar to the United States, and consequently expect capex spend across the three markets to exceed $11 billion annually over a similar time period.
In fact, in the third quarter, normalizing for the impacts of the Telxius deal co-location and amendment contributions to European organic tenant billings growth rose by around 200 basis points year over year.
Although we expect a significant portion of initial 5G investments to be focused in urban locations across our European footprint where roughly 80% of the population resides, we anticipate urban-oriented consumer demand to be complemented by an ongoing push from European regulators to deliver rural connectivity, which will represent another opportunity for us to drive colocation on our tower sites in those areas.
In fact, if you take the nearly 5,900 sites we built last year and add our expected 7,000 sites at the midpoint of our outlook to be constructed this year, it would represent almost as many sites as the previous five years combined.
And as we laid out a few quarters ago, we are targeting the construction of up to 40 to 50,000 new sites over the next five years.
With day one NOI yields on these builds continuing to average above 10%, we are excited about deploying significant capital to these initiatives going forward as we capitalize on the advancement of network technology across the emerging world while helping to connect billions of people.
At the end of the day, our 20,000-foot view is that all of these edge elements will need to fit together to provide a cohesive framework for full-scale 5G across the network ecosystem.
We expect these facilities, which have 18 megawatts of combined power, an additional four and a half megawatts of expansion capacity, to effectively complement Colo ATL and enable us to enhance our ability to develop neutral-host, multi-operator, multi-cloud data centers to support the broader core to edge connectivity evolution in the United States.
Leading global MNOs are now positioning their networks with released 16 5G stand-alone core features to explore edge cloud opportunities.
As we highlighted in our recently published 2020 corporate sustainability report, we've continued to make progress toward our goal of reducing diesel-related greenhouse gas emissions by 60% by 2027 from a 2017 baseline.
In 2020, we achieved an additional 8% reduction from 2019, reaching 53% of the 10-year goal.
We are continuing to make solid progress in 2021 with an expectation to spend an additional $80 million toward energy-efficient solutions, primarily in lithium ion and solar power across our Africa footprint, which will bring our cumulative spend to nearly $250 million.
Having already expanded our lithium ion-powered site count from 4,500 in 2019 to 6,700 in 2020, we are targeting another 8,000 sites by the end of 2022 and recently signed a multimillion dollar bulk battery purchase agreement in Africa in support of this goal.
First, we closed on our strategic partnership agreements with CDPQ and Allianz, through which they purchased an aggregate of 48% of our ATC Europe business for a total consideration of around EUR 2.6 billion.
In addition, we closed the remaining 4,000 Telxius communication sites in Germany back in August.
Second, we continued to strengthen our balance sheet, raising roughly $3 billion in senior unsecured notes, including our euro offering earlier this month.
As a result of this activity, along with the benefit from a nonrecurring advance payment received from a tenant during the quarter, we finished Q3 with net leverage of 4.9 times.
While we expect net leverage to increase back into the low 5 times range in the fourth quarter, we are right on track with our overall post-Telxius delevering path.
As you can see, our consolidated property revenue grew by over 19% year over year or over 18% on an FX-neutral basis to nearly $2.4 billion.
This included U.S. and Canada property revenue growth of around 10% and international property revenue growth of over 31% or 13% when excluding the impacts of the Telxius acquisition.
On a consolidated basis, organic tenant billings growth was nearly 5% for a second consecutive quarter.
and Canada segment of over 4%.
Contributions from colocation and amendments were more than 3%.
Escalators came in at 3.2%, and churn was just over 2%.
We drove organic tenant billings growth of nearly 6%, reflecting a sequential acceleration of around 60 basis points.
Africa was our fastest growing region in the quarter, posting organic tenant billings growth of well over 9% led by Nigeria, where we continue to see 4G investments driving both colocation activity and new site construction.
We also saw a consistent quarter in Latin America, where organic tenant billings growth was right around 7%, driven by solid new business and higher escalators primarily in Brazil.
Meanwhile, European organic tenant billings growth accelerated by around 100 basis points sequentially to nearly 5.5% as expected.
Excluding impacts from the Telxius acquisition, organic tenant billings growth in the region would have been over 4.5% in the quarter, more than 200 basis points higher than the year-ago period, driven primarily by new business contributions.
Looking to Germany, in particular, we saw a more than 300-basis-point increase in colocation and amendment contributions in our legacy business, as compared to the prior year period, resulting in organic tenant billings growth of over 5.5%, up from 5.2% in the second quarter.
Finally, in Asia Pacific, we saw organic tenant billings growth of 0.7%, up roughly 200 basis points as compared to Q2.
This reflects a modest acceleration in gross new business activity, coupled with a more than 2% sequential decline in churn, which was in line with our expectations.
Our third quarter adjusted EBITDA grew more than 19% or over 18% on an FX-neutral basis to nearly $1.6 billion.
Adjusted EBITDA margin was 63.2%, which was down compared to Q3 2020 as a result of adding new lower initial tenancy assets to our portfolio, which we believe will drive strong organic growth and, therefore, margin expansion in the future.
Cash SG&A as a percent of total property revenue was around 7.3%, a roughly 40-basis-point sequential improvement.
Moving to the right side of the slide, consolidated AFFO growth was over 13% with consolidated AFFO per share of $2.53, reflecting a per share growth of nearly 11%.
This was driven by strong performance in our core business, contributions from new assets and around $13 million in year-over-year FX favorability.
Our performance also reflected the benefits of our commitment to driving efficiency throughout our operations and minimizing financing costs despite growing the portfolio by nearly 38,000 sites over the last year.
And finally, AFFO per share attributable to AMT common stockholders was $2.49, reflecting a year-over-year growth rate of nearly 12%.
We are also slightly increasing our expectations for services revenue for the year to around $235 million as a result of an outsized third quarter, although this implies that services volumes will moderate somewhat in Q4.
Finally, incorporating the latest FX projections, our current outlook reflects negative FX impacts of $30 million for property revenue, $20 million for adjusted EBITDA, and $15 million for consolidated AFFO as compared to our prior expectations.
Looking at Slide 8, as expected, leasing trends remained strong across our global business, and as a result of an increase in pass-through together with some modest core property revenue outperformance, we are raising our property revenue outlook by $10 million.
This represents 14% year-over-year growth at the midpoint and includes $30 million in unfavorable translational FX impacts as compared to our prior outlook.
You'll see that we are reiterating our organic tenant billings growth expectations of approximately 4% on a consolidated basis.
This includes roughly 3% growth in our U.S. and Canada segment where 5G deployments are driving solid activity levels as we exit the year.
organic tenant billings growth rate of negative 1%, as we communicated previously.
On the international side, we continue to anticipate organic tenant billings growth in the range of 5 to 6% as carriers continue to focus their efforts on enhancing and densifying wireless networks in the face of ever-rising mobile data demand.
We are raising our adjusted EBITDA outlook by approximately $50 million and now expect year-over-year growth of nearly 16%.
This increase reflects continued strength in our services segment, where we now expect to see roughly $145 million in services gross margin for the year, up from the 123 million implied in our prior guidance with year-over-year growth of more than 180%.
On the cost side of the equation, we continue to maintain cost discipline globally, helping to drive adjusted EBITDA margins up by around 40 basis points for the full year as compared to prior expectations.
We are also raising our full year AFFO expectations and now expect year-over-year growth in consolidated AFFO of roughly 15% with an implied outlook midpoint of $9.64 per share.
The flow-through of incremental cash-adjusted EBITDA, coupled with the continued cash tax and net cash interest benefits as compared to the prior expectations are being partially offset by around $15 million in negative translational FX impacts.
On a per share basis, we now expect growth of approximately 14% for the year consistent with our long-term growth ambitions that we highlighted at the start of the year.
Finally, AFFO attributable to ATC common stockholders per share is expected to grow by nearly 12% versus 2020, incorporating the minority interest impacts of our strategic partnership with CDPQ and Allianz in Europe.
For the full year, we continue to expect to distribute $2.3 billion, subject to board approval, which implies a roughly 15% year-over-year per share growth rate.
Consistent with our prior comments, we anticipate growing our dividend by at least 10% annually in the coming years.
We reiterate our expectations of spending nearly $1.6 billion at the midpoint with nearly 90% being discretionary in nature.
Driving a good portion of this discretionary capex is our continued expectation to construct 7,000 sites at the midpoint this year with the vast majority in our international markets.
Including contributions from minority partners, we have deployed around $10 billion so far this year primarily for the Telxius transaction.
In total, of our nearly $14 billion in expected capital deployment for the year, we expect over 80% to be composed of discretionary growth capex and M&A.
You can see the composition of our $35 billion in cumulative capital deployments since the start of 2017, including our 2021 full year expectations.
Finally, you can see that more than a quarter or around $9.5 billion of our deployed capital in the last five years has been distributed to shareholders in the form of dividends and share repurchases.
In fact, incorporating our latest financing efforts, we now have a weighted average cost of debt of around 2.4%, a weighted average tenor of debt of approximately seven years, and over 85% of our balance sheet locked into fixed rate instruments.
