Earnings for the quarter were $1.57 per share compared to $0.65 in the prior year quarter.
Adjusted earnings per share increased to $1.83 in the quarter compared to $1.13 in 2020.
Net sales in the quarter were up 12% from the prior year, primarily due to increased volumes across all segments, favorable foreign currency translation and the pass through of higher material costs.
Segment income improved to $433 million in the quarter compared to $298 million in the prior year, primarily due to higher sales unit volumes, favorable price cost mix and the non-recurrence of charges for tinplate carryover costs that we saw in 2020.
As outlined in the release, we currently estimate second quarter 2021 adjusted earnings of between $1.70 and $1.80 per share.
We are maintaining our full year adjusted earnings guidance of $6.60 to $6.80 per share.
Assuming the sale of the European tinplate business closures at the beginning of the third quarter, we expect that the earnings dilution impact over the balance of the year of about $0.50 per share will be offset by improved results in the remaining operations as compared to our original guidance.
Our expected tax rate for the year remains at 24% to 25%.
As detailed in last night's release, we expect to commercialize 6 billion units a beverage can capacity in 2021 with further investments being made to bring on at least that much more in 2022.
Before reviewing the operating segments we thought it would be well to remind you that delivered aluminum in North America sit around $1.28 a pound versus $0.75 a pound last year at this time, so an increase of 70%.
In Americas Beverage, demand remained strong across all of the markets we serve with overall segment volumes up 9% in the first quarter.
While the CMI no longer publishes industry volumes, we can tell you that our North American volumes increased 12% in the first quarter compared to the same prior year period.
Unit volumes in European Beverage increased 6% in the first quarter as growth across Northwest Europe and the Mediterranean offset softness in Saudi Arabia.
Sales unit volumes in European Food increased 6% in the first quarter as the business continues to benefit from strong consumer demand for packaged food.
$5 million of favorable foreign exchange and the negative impact of tinplate carryover included in the prior year first quarter.
Asia-Pacific reported 8% volume growth in the first quarter as both Southeast Asia up 5% and China up more than 30%, continue to show recovery from the pandemic related shutdowns.
Excluding foreign exchange, results for Transit Packaging were in line with the prior year with industrial demand surging, activity remains extremely strong in Transit and we expect this segment will post full year segment income growth of approximately 25% in 2021 over 2020.
