Today we reported earnings of $211 million, an increase of 87% over the second quarter.
Lower loan balances along with strong credit metrics and an improving yet uncertain economic path resulted in the allowance for credit losses remaining near 2% and a provision of $5 million.
Expenses are well controlled and included a $4 million increase in charitable contributions.
ROE returned to double-digits at nearly 11% and our book value per share grew to $53.78, the seventh consecutive quarterly increase.
On a full quarter average basis, loans decreased $1.5 billion in the third quarter.
The largest contributor was a $910 million drop in average National Dealer loans in conjunction with significant decline in dealer inventory levels in the second quarter, which have yet to recover.
Deposits continue to show strong broad-based growth with average balances increasing $4.5 billion, including $3.2 billion and non-interest-bearing deposits.
The resulting increase in liquidity drove our total average assets to a record $84.3 billion.
As expected, net interest income declined $13 million as lower interest rates had a $15 million impact.
Also, net charge-offs decreased only 26 basis points.
However, given the difficulty in predicting the path of economic recovery, our credit reserve remains at over $1 billion.
Of note, following robust activity in the second quarter, derivative income declined $10 million.
Our capital remained strong with an estimated CET1 of 10.3%.
Average loans decreased $1.5 billion, which compares favorably to results for the industry as indicated by the H8 data for large banks.
As Curt mentioned, National Dealer declined $910 million due to low inventory levels impacting floor plan loans.
This resulted in an increase of nearly $800 million in second quarter average balances.
Corporate banking line utilization has returned to pre-pandemic levels with average balances down nearly $500 million in the third quarter.
General middle market loans declined about $400 million, while deposits increased nearly $2 billion.
For the portfolio as a whole, line utilization decreased to 47% at period end.
Also, our Mortgage Banker business, which serves mortgage companies, was at an all time high, increasing over $300 million due to very robust refi and home sale activity.
Loan yields were 3.13%, a decrease of 13 basis points from the second quarter.
One month LIBOR, the rate we are most sensitive to, declined 19 basis points.
Deposits increased 7% or $4.5 billion to a new record of $68.8 billion, as shown on Slide 5.
Period end deposits increased over $700 million.
With strong deposit growth, our loan-to-deposit ratio decreased to 76%.
The average cost of interest-bearing deposits was 17 basis points, a decrease of nine basis points from the second quarter.
Our prudent management of relationship pricing in this low rate environment, our large proportion of non-interest-bearing deposits as well as the floating rate nature of our wholesale funding drove our total funding cost only 14 basis points for the quarter.
We added $1.75 billion in treasuries and $500 million in mortgage-backed securities.
In addition, we continue to reinvest prepays, which remained elevated at around $1 billion for the quarter.
Yields on recent purchases have been around 140 basis points.
The additional securities combined with lower rates on the replacement of prepays resulted in the yield on the portfolio declining to 2.13%.
Net interest income declined $13 million to $458 million and the net interest margin was 2.33%, a decline of 17 basis points relative to the second quarter.
The major factors were lower rates, which had a negative impact of $15 million or seven basis points in the margin, and the increase in excess liquidity reduced the margin by nine basis points.
Interest income on loans declined $26 million and reduced the margin 13 basis points.
Lower interest rates on loans alone had an impact of $21 million and 11 basis points in the margin.
Lower balances had a $14 million impact, and the mix shift in portfolio, including the full quarter of lower yielding PPP loans had a four basis point impact on the margin.
As discussed on the previous slide, we had lower yields and higher balances in our securities portfolio, which together had a $2 million and two basis point negative impact.
Higher deposits of the Fed added $1 million, but had a negative impact of nine basis points on the margin.
Deposit cost declined by $5 million and added three basis points to the margin, primarily a result of a prudent management of deposit pricing, as I previously mentioned.
Finally, with a reduction in balances and lower rates, wholesale funding cost declined by $9 million, adding four basis points to the margin.
We received the full quarter benefit of debt repayments we made in the second quarter, and we prepaid $750 million in FHLB advances in July and August.
Net charge-offs were $33 million or 26 basis points, including recoveries of $20 million.
Criticized loans remained relatively stable with an increase of only $27 million and comprised 6.5% of the total portfolio.
Non-performing loans remained low at 62 basis points, and the bulk of the $54 million increase in the third quarter was attributed to energy loans.
This combined with the reduction in loan balances, resulted in a slight decrease in our allowance for credit losses, which remains above $1 billion.
Our credit reserve ratio was 2.14%, excluding PPP loans.
Our credit reserve coverage for NPLs was strong at 3.2 times.
They decreased $251 million to $1.8 billion at quarter end and represent 3.5% of our total loans.
E&P loans make up nearly 80% of the energy portfolio.
And energy services, which is considered the riskiest segment, was only $46 million.
The allocation of reserves to energy loans remained above 10%.
While non-accrual loans increased, criticized loans decreased $102 million and net charge-offs decreased to $9 million.
Charge-offs are net of $14 million in recoveries, which are unlikely to repeat in the near-term.
With more than 40 years of serving this industry, we have deep expertise and remain focused on working with our energy customers as they navigate the cycle.
That aside, period end loans in the social distancing segment decreased $145 million or 5%.
As expected, criticized loans increased $102 million, yet remained manageable at 10% of the segment and non-accruals remained very low.
Similar to the social distancing segment, while loans decreased about $250 million, the criticized portion increased, yet non-accruals decreased and remained low.
Balances increased to $85 million and criticized and non-accrual loans were slightly higher.
Total deferrals at September 30 dropped only 70 basis points of total loans.
Non-interest income increased $5 million, as outlined on Slide 12.
Deposit service charges were up $5 million with increased cash management activity.
Also, card fees remained very strong and increased $3 million due to higher consumer volumes and merchant activity spurred by the economic stimulus as well as changes in customer behavior related to COVID.
Derivative income also included a $6 million unfavorable credit valuation adjustment compared to an unfavorable adjustment of $3 million in the second quarter.
Securities trading income decreased $2 million, but remained at an elevated level and reflects fair market adjustments for investments we hold related to our technology and life sciences business.
Deferred comp asset returns were $8 million, a $6 million increase from last quarter, which is offsetting non-interest expenses.
Salaries and benefits increased $8 million.
This included the increase in deferred comp of $6 million that I just mentioned as well as seasonally higher staff insurance.
Since early March, Comerica, together with Comerica Charitable Foundation, has distributed over $9 million to over 150 non-profit and other community service organizations.
Outside processing decreased $4 million, primarily related to lower PPP loan initiation volumes.
In addition, operational losses and legal-related costs declined $3 million.
Our capital levels remained strong, increasing to an estimated CET1 of 10.26%, as shown on Slide 14.
We were focused on maintaining our attractive dividend and deploying our capital to drive growth, while we maintain strong capital levels with the CET1 target of 10%.
As we've already absorbed the bulk of the effect from the decline in rates, we estimate the net effect of lower rates alone will be $5 million or less.
The impact from reduced loan balances, lower interest rates on loans and lower yields on securities is expected to be mostly offset by additional rate floors on loans, a decrease in deposit rates to an average of 14 basis points, as well as the full quarter benefit of third quarter actions to increase our securities portfolio and reduced wholesale borrowings.
Although the pace of the economic recovery remains uncertain, with our credit reserve at about 2% of loans in the third quarter, we believe we are well positioned to manage through it.
