First quarter was another example of steady execution, and it's illustrated by us generating $101 million in free cash flow.
So for the quarter, we repurchased 1.5 million shares at an average price of $12.26 per share at a total cost of $18 million.
We still have ample capacity of around $240 million under our existing stock repurchase program, which, as a reminder, that's not subject to an expiration date.
Also in the quarter, we upped our free cash flow guidance by $25 million to $450 million.
That's $2.04 per share compared to the previous guidance of $1.93 per share.
Our steady performance drives our confidence in continuing to execute upon our seven year free cash flow plan, and we continue to expect will generate over $3 billion over those seven years.
While our Q1 result of $0.66 is up roughly $0.05 quarter-over-quarter, we're still more than $0.11 better than our next closest competitor.
It's also worth noting that, that $0.05 increase was driven predominantly by some reworking of our FT book, which allowed us to eliminate some unused FT and exchanges for some FT that is better matched up with our production locations.
That is how we generate, on average, $500 million per year of free cash flow over the next six years at strip pricing.
We are expecting around $10 million of unused firm transportation to roll off in 2021, a modest amount next year in 2022 and then another $20 million rolling off across -- through 2023 through 2025.
So with these changes, and assuming all future free cash flow goes toward debt repayments, we would expect fully burden cost to decrease to around $0.90 per Mcfe and then lower in years beyond 2021.
During the quarter, we turned in line five Marcellus wells, and we're in the process of drilling out another 13 that will be turned in line within the next two weeks.
Those 18 wells had an average lateral length of just over 13,000 feet and has an average all-in cost of less than $650 per foot per lateral foot.
Also during the quarter, we brought online two Southwest PA Utica wells, the Majorsville 12 wells.
Deep Utica have continued to come down with the all-in capital cost for these two wells averaging $1,420 per lateral foot.
As we've really discussed, we only have four additional SWPA Utica wells in our long-term plan through 2026, but based on what we're seeing so far at Majorsville 12, we're excited about the deep Utica's potential as either a growth driver if gas prices improve or as a continuation of our business plan for years and into the future.
Speaking of our hedging program, during Q1, we added 136 Bcf of NYMEX hedges, 15.5 Bcf of index hedges and 61.3 Bcf of basis hedges.
For 2021, we are now approximately 94% hedged on gas based on the midpoint of our guidance range and after backing out 6% to liquids.
That 94% includes both NYMEX and basis hedges or fully covered volumes, which are hedged at $2.48 per Mcf.
Our confidence in future execution supports a $25 million increase in our 2021 free cash flow guidance and our continued expectation to generate over $3 billion across our long-term plan.
As you can see, CNX has an incredibly low reinvestment rate, which supports our expectation to generate average annual free cash flow of $500 million across our long-term plan.
In the quarter, we reduced net debt by approximately $70 million.
Lastly, as you can see on the slide, our public debt continues to trade in the 4% to 5% range.
We also increased our NGL realization expectations by $5 per barrel as a result of the increase in expected NGL realizations.
As we have already highlighted, we are increasing free cash flow for the year by $25 million.
First, we proactively reduced Scope one and two CO2 emissions over 90% since 2011, something that a few, if any, of any public company had claimed.
This resulted in historical mitigation of cumulatively over 700 Bcf of methane emission that would have otherwise been vented into the atmosphere.
The elimination of diesel fuel in this operation is equivalent to taking 23,000 passenger vehicles off the road for a year.
We recycled 98% of produced fluid in our core operation.
These are the strategies that have allowed CNX to thrive for over 150 years and will continue to drive our success.
We've committed to make substantial multi-year community investment of $30 million over the next six years to widen the path of the middle class in our local community, while growing the local talent pipeline.
100% of our new hires will be from our area of operation, and we will maintain at least 90% local contract workforce.
We committed 6% of our contract spend to local, diverse and businesses in 2021 and dedicated 40% of the total CNX small business spend to companies within the Tri-State area.
Finally, while you will hear more about this in the weeks and months ahead, I want to take the opportunity to announce that CNX is developing an innovative proprietary solution in combination with a few commercial solutions that allows us to significantly minimize from a blowdown and pneumatic devices, which make up about 50% of our emission source.
