1 CRM just got better.
And from a business perspective, well, I'd say it's been an absolutely extraordinary 18 months for Salesforce, I know for all of you and certainly for all the CEOs I met with today.
And you can see we delivered our first $6-billion-quarter, about $6.3 billion, and continue to maintain our very strong growth rate, our profitability, our cash flow, our margin growth, continue to execute our new operating margin model.
And you can see right now, revenue and the growth in the quarter, you can see $6.34 billion, up 23% year over year.
And I guess I'm -- as excited as I am about the revenue, I'm also very excited that as we're executing this new operating margin model, we can see the margin in the quarter was also a very healthy, 20.4%, up 20 basis points year over year, and also delivered $386 million in operating cash flow.
For fiscal year '22, we are raising again our guide to $26.3 billion, which is now at the high end of our range.
It's a raise of $300 million, and it's going to represent about 24% projected growth year over year and just really reflects, I think, how well the company is doing in its core, not just through the Slack acquisition, but you can see organically, especially when you look at the numbers over the last five quarters.
And we're raising our operating margin to 18.5%, up 80 basis points year over year.
One is in our core products, our focus on customer success, the Customer 360 now with the Slack user interface and everything being Slack first, but also our core values.
And as we start to head toward the Fortune 100, I think that -- a lot of the companies that I met with today were mostly Fortune 100 CEOs.
And I'll tell you, I'm very excited that five out of the last five quarters that we've had that 20% or greater revenue growth.
And three out of the last five quarters, we're having greater than 20% operating margin.
So, we are really quite confident and remain on our path to generate $50 billion in revenue by fiscal year '26, which doesn't seem very far away from right now.
