Dana delivered $2.2 billion of sales, representing an increase of $210 million over this time last year as our customers continue to see strong demand despite several headwinds.
Diluted adjusted EBITDA for the quarter was $210 million, a $9 million improvement over last year.
Free cash flow was a use of $170 million as the semiconductor shortage drove significant and unplanned OEM demand reductions which, of course, led to substantial downstream component inventory accumulation across the company.
Diluted adjusted earnings per share was up slightly compared with last year at $0.41 for the quarter.
Please turn to page 5 and we'll begin our discussion with the ongoing supply chain challenges and how it is impacting our markets.
For example, the current Class 8 truck sales backlogs have reached pre-pandemic levels, and finished vehicle inventory levels for construction and agriculture equipment are at the lowest levels in the last three years, resulting in unfulfilled end-customer demand.
The combination of our past successes, present capabilities, application know-how, and clearly demand [Phonetic] strategy for the future enables us to partner with and create value for our customers at any stage of their electrification progression, ultimately leading to us winning our share of nearly $19 billion addressable market by the end of the decade.
In the third quarter of this year, sales were $2.2 billion, a $210 million increase over last year, primarily driven by improved demand in our heavy-vehicle end-markets and the recoveries of raw material cost inflation in the form of higher selling prices to our customers.
Adjusted EBITDA was $210 million for a profit margin of 9.5%, which was 60 basis points lower than last year despite the higher sales as margin compression from raw material cost inflation more than offset the margin expansion from organic sales growth.
Diluted adjusted earnings per share was $0.41, a $0.04 improvement from the prior year.
And finally, free cash flow though was a use of $170 million, which was significantly lower than the third quarter of last year due to higher working capital requirements this year as recent customer schedule volatility and supply chain challenges have mandated higher inventory levels to ensure on-time delivery.
First, the organic growth increase of over $100 million was driven by improved demand for heavy vehicles in both our commercial vehicle and off-highway equipment segments.
The elevated incremental conversion of 40% was the result of targeted cost containment and cost recovery actions in the quarter, which helped to offset operational inefficiencies brought on by volatile customer production schedules, supply chain disruptions, and labor shortages.
Second, foreign currency translation increased sales by about $20 million as the dollar weakened against a basket of foreign currencies, principally the euro.
During the quarter, gross commodity cost increased by more than $100 million compared to last year.
We recovered nearly 70% of these cost increases in the form of higher selling prices to our customers.
Free cash flow was a use in the quarter of $170 million.
Inventory levels increased by more than $100 million sequentially and more than $400 million versus the same time last year as, at the time, the industry was just ramping the supply chain back up coming out of the pandemic containment-related shutdowns in the second quarter of 2020.
We now anticipate full-year sales to be $8.9 billion at the midpoint of our revised range, down about $100 million from the indication we provided during our Q2 earnings call as lower-than-expected market demand of, approximately, $170 million will be partially offset by $70 million in additional commodity recoveries.
Full-year adjusted EBITDA is now expected to be about $845 million at the midpoint of the revised range, which is down about $115 million from our previous indication.
Loss contribution margin from lower end-market demand and higher operating costs make up, approximately, $70 million of this profit headwind and increased commodity costs will further lower profit by about $45 million.
Profit margin is expected to be, approximately, 9.5% and free cash flow margin is expected to be about 1%.
Diluted adjusted earnings per share is expected to be a $1.85 per share at the midpoint of the range.
First, organic growth is now expected to add nearly $1.4 billion in sales.
Incremental margins are expected in the mid-20s providing nearly 300 basis points of margin expansion.
Third, we anticipate the impact of foreign currency translation to now be a benefit of, approximately, $150 million to sales and about $15 million to profit with no material impact to our profit margin.
And finally, we now expect gross commodity cost increases to be about $350 million compared to last year as steel prices have continued to escalate.
We anticipate recovering about $235 million, or just below 70% of the increase, from our customers in the form of higher selling prices leaving a net profit impact of $115 million, which will compress margins by about 170 basis points.
The quarterly sales and profit cadence of our revised full-year guidance for 2021 is atypical where we now expect second-half margins to be about 200 basis points lower sequentially.
We now anticipate full-year free cash flow margin to be comparable with last year at about 1%, which represents a modest improvement of about $30 million as $0.25 billion of higher profits are invested in working capital to navigate the current environment and higher capital spending to fuel our future growth.
Please turn with me now to page 16 for our perspective on the near-term challenges on the backdrop of the long-term outlook for our business.
This is illustrated by the chart in the upper right of the page where we affirm our conviction that our business will exceed $10 billion of sales in 2023, and this represents 45% growth over three years and will lead to substantial profit and cash flow margin expansion as we progress toward our long-term financial potential.
We expect the sales of our electrified products to double in the next two years contributing to the greater than $10 billion of sales in 2023, but then quadruple by the end of the decade to deliver a $3 billion business that will expand our profit and cash flow margins and reposition the business for the future.
This bright future is made possible by the highly skilled and extremely dedicated team of more than 38,000 around the globe who day in and day out embody the spirit of our company, people finding a better way.
