We generated $6.9 billion of sales in the first quarter with 30% core revenue growth.
We saw over 20% growth in the developed market, led by North America and Western Europe.
High-growth markets were up more than 45%, largely driven by the recovery in China.
Our gross profit margin increased 580 basis points year-over-year to 62% in the first quarter, largely due to higher sales volumes and the positive impact of higher-margin product mix.
Our operating profit margin of 29.1% was up 1,300 basis points year-over-year, including more than 900 basis points of core margin expansion as a result of higher gross margins and lower operating expenses as we continue to see limited travel and other related costs.
Adjusted diluted net earnings per common share of $2.52 were up 140% versus last year.
We generated $1.6 billion of free cash flow in the quarter, an increase of 135% year-over-year.
Now in the first quarter, we deployed more than $400 million of capital toward mergers and acquisitions across all three segments.
Between these four businesses, we're investing more than $1 billion in 2021 to continue to meet our customers' needs today and well into the future.
Life Sciences reported revenue increased 115% as a result of the Cytiva acquisition, and core revenue was up 41.5%.
In our bioprocessing businesses, accelerating demand for COVID-related vaccines and therapeutic development and production drove a combined core revenue growth rate of more than 60% at Cytiva and Pall Biotech.
Reported revenue was up 34%, and core revenue grew 31%.
Each of our largest operating companies in the platform achieved high single digit or better core revenue growth, led by Cepheid, which achieved more than 90% core revenue growth.
In response to the unprecedented demand for Cepheid's rapid point-of-care molecular test, the team again increased production capacity and shipped over 10 million respiratory test cartridges in the first quarter.
Roughly half of the tests shipped were COVID-only tests, and the other half were 4-in-1 combination test for COVID-19 Flu A, Flu B and RSV.
Reported revenue grew 6.5% and core revenue was up 3.5%.
Additionally, we expect to have operating profit fall-through of approximately 40% in the second quarter and for the remainder of 2021.
This would include an estimated $2 billion of 2021 revenue at Cytiva and Pall Biotech associated with vaccines and therapeutics, which is higher than our previous expectation of $1.3 billion.
And at Cepheid, we'll continue ramping capacity through the year and now expect to ship approximately 45 million tests in 2021 compared to our prior estimate of 36 million tests.
