The demand environment in the quarter was robust and continued the momentum from the first quarter and despite posting a 30% organic top-line growth, we exit Q2 with a sequentially higher order backlog.
It's been 90 days since the last time we were asked the question about the duration of "transitory inflation".
We are raising our annual revenue growth guidance to 15% to 17%, and our adjusted earnings per share guidance to $7.30 a share to $7.40 a share.
Engineered Products revenue was up 25% organically.
Importantly, waste handling bookings were robust and the backlog was up nearly 75% versus the prior year.
Fueling Solutions was up 25% organically in the quarter on the strength of the above ground and below ground retail fueling globally, including some remaining tailwinds from the EMV opportunity in the U.S. following the April deadline.
Order backlogs were up 29%, and we expect our software and service business hanging hardware, vehicle wash and compliance-driven underground product offerings to help offset the anticipated headwinds from the EMV roll-off.
Sales in Imaging & ID improved 20% organically.
Margins improved by 420 basis points on volume leverage, pricing and productivity initiatives.
Pumps & Process Solution posted another banner quarter at 34% organic growth on improved volumes across all businesses except Precision Components.
Industrial pumps grew by over 20% on robust end customer demand with particular strength in China.
Margins in the quarter expanded by 910 basis points on strong volumes, favorable mix and pricing.
Top-line growth in Refrigeration & Food Equipment continued its impressive clip posting a 44% organic growth.
Margins in the segment improved by 580 basis points, driven by strong volumes and productivity actions partially offset by availability issues with installation raw materials and labor and food retail operations, we expect -- which we expect to subside in the second half.
Our top-line organic revenue increased by 30% in the quarter with all five segments posting growth with particular strength in our Pumps & Process Solutions and Refrigeration & Food Equipment segments.
FX benefited the top-line by about 5% or $68 million.
Acquisitions added $19 million of revenue in the quarter.
The U.S., our largest market posted 25% organic growth in the quarter on solid trading conditions in retail fueling, marking & coding, biopharma, food retail and can making.
Europe grew by 30% on strong shipments in vehicle aftermarket, biopharma and industrial pumps and heat exchangers.
All of Asia was up 38% organically on growth in biopharma, marking & coding, plastics and polymers, heat exchangers and retail fueling demand outside of China.
China, which represents a little over half of our business in Asia was up 33% organically in the quarter.
Moving to the bottom of the page, bookings were up 61% organically, reflecting continued broad-based momentum across the portfolio.
On the top of the chart, adjusted EBIT was up $173 million and margin improved 400 basis points, as improved volumes, continued productivity initiatives and strategic pricing offset input cost inflation.
Adjusted segment EBITDA was up 350 basis points.
Adjusted net earnings improved by $135 million as higher segment EBIT more than offset higher taxes, as well as higher corporate expenses primarily relating to compensation accruals and deal expenses.
The effective tax rate excluding discrete tax benefits was approximately 21.7% for the quarter compared to 21.6% in the prior year.
Discrete tax benefits were $11 million in the quarter or $9 million higher than 2020 for approximately $0.07 of a year-over-year earnings per share impact.
Rightsizing and other costs were $11 million in the quarter or $8 million after-tax.
We are pleased with the cash performance thus far this year, with free cash flow of $364 million, a $96 million increase over last year.
Free cash flow conversion stands at 9% of revenue for the first half of the year, 80 basis points higher than the comparable period last year, despite a significant investment in working capital and the impact of prior year tax deferrals that did not repeat this year.
On the left hand, you can see a sample of the current growth and productivity capex projects that we are working on, that add up to $75 million of spend.
Our current dry powder on a full-year '21 basis is approximately $3.3 billion.
Our revised annual guidance is on Page 11.
We now expect to achieve 15% to 17% all-in revenue growth this year.
