Let's go to Page 3.
Our revenue and bookings growth continued to outpace our pre-pandemic levels and we exited the quarter with a record high and sequentially increased backlog while posting top line growth of 15% over the comparable period.
Demand strength was broad based as each segment posted year-over-year growth in bookings and a book to bill above 1.
Revenue growth, product -- positive product mix and ongoing productivity initiatives drove comparable operating margins up resulting in a 31% increase in US GAAP diluted earnings per share [Technical Issues].
Our free cash flow performance was strong with an 18% year-over-year increase despite significant investments we've made in inventory as we begin to reap the benefits of investments in the centralization of financial processing activities.
Engineered Products revenue was up 14% organically with a significant portion of the growth from pricing actions.
Fueling Solutions was up 3% organically in the quarter on solid demand in North America for above ground and below ground retail fueling.
Margins in the segment declined 150 basis points in the quarter as productivity headwinds from supply chain constraints in sub components and negative mix more than offset higher volumes and pricing.
Sales in Imaging & Identification grew 7% organically.
Margins in Imaging & ID improved by 250 basis points as volume leverage, pricing and productivity initiatives more than offset input cost inflation.
Pumps & Process Solutions posted another solid quarter of 25% organic growth.
Margins in the quarter expanded by a robust 630 basis points on strong volume, fixed cost absorption, favorable product mix and pricing.
Top line results in Refrigeration & Food Equipment remained strong posting 16% organic growth.
Our top line organic revenue increased by 13% in the quarter with all five segments posting growth with strong demand in our Engineered Products, Pumps & Process Solutions and Refrigeration & Food Equipment segments.
FX benefited the top line by about 1% or $21 million.
Acquisitions added $18 million of revenue in the quarter.
The US, our largest market, posted 16% organic growth in the quarter on solid trading conditions in retail fueling, industrial automation, biopharma and can making.
Europe grew by 16% in the quarter on strong shipments in marking, coding, biopharma and industrial pumps, can making and heat exchangers.
All of Asia was up 5% organically on growth in biopharma and industrial pumps and heat exchangers, partially offset by year-over-year declines in polymer processing, below ground retail fueling and fuel transport.
China, which represents approximately half of our business in Asia, was up 8% organically in the quarter.
Bookings were up 25% organically, reflecting the continued broad based momentum across the portfolio.
On the top of the chart, adjusted segment EBIT was up $64 million and adjusted EBIT margin improved 80 basis points as improved volumes, continued productivity initiatives and strategic pricing offset cost inflation and production stoppages.
Going to the bottom of chart, adjusted net earnings improved by $57 million as higher segment EBIT and lower corporate expenses more than offset higher taxes.
Deal expenses in the quarter were $3 million.
The effective tax rate for the third quarter, excluding tax discrete benefits, was approximately 21.8% compared to 21.5% in the prior year.
And our effective tax rate estimate pre-discrete for Q4 and the full year remains unchanged at 21% to 22%.
Discrete tax benefits were $8 million for the quarter or $4 million higher than in 2020 for approximately $0.03 of year-over-year earnings per share impact.
Rightsizing and other costs were a $2 million reduction to adjusted earnings in the quarter as a one-time recovery related to a cancellation settlement more than offset our ongoing productivity and rightsizing initiatives.
We are pleased with the cash performance thus far this year with cash -- with free cash flow of $667 million, a $104 million increase over last year.
Free cash flow conversion stands at 11% of revenue year-to-date despite a nearly $250 million investment in working capital.
Unified Brands represents less than 2% of our overall revenue and its sale will have negligible impact on our '21 adjusted EPS.
