Let's begin with the summary of results on Page 3.
Revenue declined 5% organically and bookings were flat, with a third of our operating companies posting positive year-over-year bookings for the quarter, and more than half posting positive comparable growth in the month of September.
Cash flow in the quarter was strong at 17% of revenue and 127% of adjusted net earnings.
Year-to-date, we have generated $117 million more in free cash flow over the comparable period last year, owing to a robust conversion management and capital discipline.
As a result of our performance in the first three quarters of the year and a solid order backlog, we are raising our annual adjusted earnings per share guidance to $5.40 to $5.45 per share.
General industrial capital spending remains subdued in Q3, resulting in a 10% organic decline for an Engineered Products, driven by softness in capex levered industrial automation, industrial winches and waste handling.
Sales in Imaging & Identification declined 8% organically due to continued weakness in digital textile printing.
This was another quarter of exemplary margin performance in the segment, with more than 300 basis points of margin expansion driven by broad based productivity efforts, cost controlled and impacted businesses, favorable mix and pricing, which more than offset lower volume and some of the portfolio.
FX, which had been a net revenue headwind for us since mid-2018, flipped in the quarter and benefited top line by 1% or $12 million, driven principally by strengthening of the euro against the dollar.
Acquisitions more than offset dispositions in the quarter by $3 million.
The US, our largest market, declined by 4% organically due to softness in waste handling industrial winches and precision components, partially offset by a strong quarter in our above-ground retail fueling, marking and coding, beverage can making, and food retail businesses among others.
Europe declined by 4% organically, a material improvement compared to a 19% decline in Q2, driven by constructive activity in our pumps, biopharma and hygienic, and plastics and polymer businesses.
All of Asia declined 10% organically, while China representing approximately half of our business in Asia, posted an 8% year-over-year decline.
Bookings were nearly flat, down 1% organically year-over-year, compared to a 21% decline in Q2, reflecting continued momentum across our businesses.
Overall, our backlog is currently approximately $200 million or 14% higher compared to this time last year, positioning us well for the remainder of the year and into 2021.
On the top of the chart, despite a $77 million revenue decline in the quarter, we were able to keep our adjusted segment earnings approximately flat year-over-year, a testament to our proactive cost containment and productivity initiatives that help drive 100 basis points of adjusted EBITDA margin improvement.
Adjusted net earnings declined by $3 million, principally driven by higher corporate costs related to deal fees and expense accruals, partially offset by lower interest expense and lower taxes on lower earnings.
The effective tax rate excluding discrete tax benefits is approximately 21.5% for the quarter, substantially the same as the prior year.
Discrete tax benefits quarter-over-quarter were approximately $2 million lower in 2020.
Right sizing and other costs were $6 million in the quarter relating to several new permanent cost containment initiatives that we pulled forward into this year.
We are pleased with the cash performance, with year-to-date free cash flow of $563 million, a $117 million or [Indecipherable] over last year.
Free cash flow now stands at 11.5% of revenue year-to-date, going into the fourth quarter, which traditionally has been our strongest cash flow quarter of the year.
I'm on Page 8.
As you may recall, we entered the year with a program entailing $50 million in structural cost reductions as part of our multi-year program highlighted at our 2019 Investor Day.
We actioned more structural initiatives, which resulted in approximately $75 million of permanent cost reduction in 2020, leaving a $25 million annualized carryover benefit into 2021.
We expect robust cash flow this year on the back of solid year-to-date cash flow generation and target free cash flow margin at the upper end of our guidance between 11% and 12%.
Capital expenditures should tally up to approximately $159 for the year, with most of the larger outlays behind us.
In summation, we're raising our adjusted earnings per share guidance to $5.40 per share to $5.45 per share for the full year, above the top end range of our prior guidance.
