This can generate over 1,100 megawatt hours of clean energy.
We were also recognized by Points of Light for the fourth consecutive year as one of the Civic 50.
This award highlights DTE as one of the top 50 community-minded companies nationwide and corporate citizenship.
We also launched a Tree Trim Academy to create 200 high-paying jobs in Detroit.
It will also help us continue to improve electric liability as Trees account for over 70% of our customer outages.
Now DTE Midstream is a stand-alone company and DTE Energy is a predominantly pure-play utility with 90% of operating earnings coming from our utilities.
We delivered a strong second quarter with earnings of $1.70 per share and we are raising our 2021 operating earnings guidance and continue to pay a strong dividend.
For over 60 years, the River Rouge Power Plant delivered safe, reliable and affordable energy for community throughout, Southeast Michigan.
So far, we've reached 950 megawatts of voluntary renewable commitments with large business customers and approximately 35,000 residential customers.
We have an additional 400 megawatts in the very advanced stages of discussion for future customers.
MIGreenPower is one of the largest voluntary renewable programs in the nation and helps advance our work toward our net 0 carbon emission goal while helping our customers meet their decarbonization goals.
At DTE Gas, we are on track to achieve net 0 greenhouse gas emissions by 2050.
Finally, we have over 3,000 customers subscribed, and we are looking forward to seeing it become as successful as our voluntary renewable program at DTE Electric.
We are raising our operating earnings guidance midpoint from $5.51 per share to $5.77 per share, moving our year-over-year growth and operating earnings per share guidance from 7.4% to a robust 12.5%.
With all of this work, we feel great about achieving a smooth 5% to 7% growth trajectory into 2022 and through the five-year plan.
90% of our future operating earnings will be from our two regulated utilities, where we have a large investment agenda with $17 billion of capital investment in our five-year plan, focused on clean energy and customer reliability.
Total operating earnings for the quarter were $329 million.
This translates into $1.70 per share.
DTE Electric earnings were $238 million for the quarter, which was $19 million higher than the second quarter of 2020, primarily due to higher commercial sales, rate implementation and warmer weather offset by nonqualified benefit plan gains that we had in 2020.
Operating earnings were $7 million, $4 million lower than the second quarter of last year.
Operating earnings for GSP were $86 million.
This was $16 million higher than the second quarter of 2020, driven primarily by the LEAP pipeline going into service and strong earnings across the pipeline segment.
On the next row, you can see our Power and Industrial segment operating earnings were $34 million.
This is a $9 million increase from second quarter last year due to new RNG projects beginning operation.
On the next one, you can see our operating earnings at our Energy Trading business were $21 million, which is $16 million higher than second quarter earnings last year due primarily to strong performance in the gas portfolio.
Finally, Corporate and Other was unfavorable $22 million quarter-over-quarter, primarily due to the timing of taxes and higher interest expense.
Overall, DTE earned $1.70 per share in the second quarter of 2021, which is $0.17 per share higher than 2020.
And we are also increasing our 2021 operating earnings per share guidance midpoint $5.51 per share to $5.77 per share.
We have a strong investment-grade rating and targeted an FFO-to-debt ratio of 16%.
With the proceeds from the spin-off of DTM, we are retiring long-term parent debt of approximately $2.6 billion after debt breakage costs.
These were NPV-positive transaction and immediately earnings per share accretive as we were able to retire a higher interest rate debt to support our current plan and to deliver our 5% to 7% operating earnings per share growth rate.
We feel great about our second quarter accomplishments, and we are confident in achieving our increased 2021 guidance and continuing to deliver on our long-term 5% to 7% operating earnings per share growth rate.
