But despite the challenges at the start of the third quarter, we ended strong, delivering an adjusted earnings per share of $0.78 with Chili's sales returning to positive territory from an absolute perspective.
When we look at our more normalized performance of fiscal '19, Chili's sales are up 10%, and nearly three-quarters of our restaurants are generating meaningful positive results, even though we're still social distancing and wearing masks in all of our restaurants and we're still operating under capacity restraints across the country.
It's Just Wings continues to perform well, and we're on track to hit that $150 million target we set at the beginning of the year.
Wings is now in nine countries and 160 locations outside the U.S., making it a formidable brand in just its first year.
For the third quarter of fiscal 2021, Brinker reported total revenues of $820 million with consolidated comp sales of negative 3.3%.
Our adjusted diluted earnings per share for the quarter was $0.78.
Chili's recorded flat comp sales and positive 4% traffic for the quarter, with the year-over-year performance improving throughout the quarter.
Regional performance is strong nationwide with a broad range of state markets rebuilding their dining room sales back to higher levels, above 75%, let's say when compared to pre-COVID performance.
First, we had a holiday flip the first week, with Christmas moving into the quarter, resulting in a negative 1% comp sales impact.
In February, we experienced Uri, a most unique winter storm that hit with historic subzero temperatures and power outages for more than a week, affecting approximately 30% of our restaurants.
The material impact of the storm resulted in an estimated $10.5 million in lost revenues, a negative impact to consolidated comp sales of 1.2%, and reduced adjusted earnings per share of approximately $0.06.
In this regard, the consolidated two-year comp results for Brinker for the first four weeks of April was a positive 6.3%, driven by Chili's results of a positive 10.1% for the same time frame.
I would note that Chili's is lapping off of a positive 2.9% in the third quarter of F '19.
Increasing sales volumes also favorably impacted margins, resulting in a consolidated restaurant operating margin for the third quarter of 13.9% compared to 12.8% for the third quarter of fiscal '20.
Again, the winter storms had a negative impact on ROM, reducing the margin by an estimated 30 basis points.
Food and beverage expense as a percent of company sales was 70 basis points favorable to prior year, primarily driven by menu mix as we featured steak on three for $10 in the prior year.
Labor expense, again as a percent of company sales, was favorable 70 basis points as compared to the prior year.
During the quarter, we meaningfully increased our manager bonus payout, impacting margins by approximately 60 basis points as we move to reward this critical leadership level for outstanding performance.
Restaurant expense was unfavorable year over year by 30 basis points, a reflection of increased off-premise costs such as packaging and fees, driven by our successful off-premise sales channels.
Year to date, we have generated $268 million in operating cash flow.
During the third quarter, we used a portion of that cash flow to repay $115 million in revolver borrowings, bringing the outstanding balance to under $300 million.
Capital expenditures year-to-date totaled approximately $62 million.
We opened two new Chili's during the third quarter and two additional locations in April, bringing our total for this fiscal year to 10.
We continue to target expanding new restaurant development to a range of 18 to 22 restaurants a year.
In fiscal 2021, we will invest approximately $20 million of capital and technology that enhances our digital guest connectivity, supports our virtual brand growth, and improves our in-restaurant dining experience.
Total revenue is estimated to be in the $950 million to $1 billion range.
Adjusted earnings per diluted share are estimated in the $1.55 to $1.70 range.
Weighted average diluted shares are estimated to be in the 47 million to 48 million share range.
