With our land and expand strategy that has worked for the better part of 15 years, our focus has mainly been on the first part of that, adding advisors and accounts to the platform in ways they want to be served by us by investment.
Today, we have more than 103,000 financial use advisors using the Envestnet wealth technology.
Those advisors oversee more than 12 million accounts with $3.8 trillion assets supported by our platform.
We now have over 200 integrations, and we continue to see success in renewing, expanding and cross-selling existing enterprise relationships, while we're also establishing new ones.
Recently, a client of ours, Citizens Bank, signed an additional schedule for unlimited retirement block use for approximately 4,000 personal bankers and on their public website for consumers to access directly.
Sales to independent advisors, those who are not associated with a large broker-dealer or enterprise, were up 23% in the second quarter over last year.
The number of advisors who are using our tax and impact overlay solutions grew 16% since just this past December, and overlay accounts grew 19%.
Advisers using these solutions are up 12% and impact portfolio accounts are up 18% since the end of just last year.
Quantitative portfolios, our first direct indexing solution, also experienced higher usage, with 23% more advisors using these solutions in 33% more accounts also since the end of 2019.
Several large firms, including a top 20 RIA, according to Barron's, are transitioning a meaningful amount of their managed account assets to our platform as they seek an operationally efficient way to migrate to model-traded UMAs.
To date, we've secured open banking agreements with half of the top 10 U.S. banks.
We're actively engaged with 25 banks at the moment and expect to have 10 more agreements executed by the end of the year.
Adjusted revenue for the quarter was $235 million, well above the guidance we provided.
As a result, our adjusted EBITDA of $55.8 million was up 29% compared to last year.
This translated to similarly strong performance and adjusted earnings per share of $0.59, 28% above last year.
However, the market at June 30 was still not back to beginning of the year levels, and our AUMA was down around $22 billion from the beginning of the year.
Specifically, second quarter market action was a positive $60 billion in AUMA, offsetting a good portion of the negative $82 billion in the first quarter.
We now expect adjusted revenue for the year to be between $977 million and $980 million, up 7% to 8% year-over-year.
Adjusted EBITDA to be between $221 million and $223 million, up 14% to 15% year-over-year.
And adjusted earnings per share to be between $2.28 and $2.31.
We ended June with $92 million in cash and debt of $620 million.
Our net leverage ratio at the end of June was 2.3 times EBITDA, down from 2.6 at the end of March.
With $225 million available on our revolver and positive cash flow generation, we are comfortable that we have the liquidity and flexibility as we balance managing the business in the current environment with continuing to invest in growth opportunities, both organically and through strategic activities.
During the 10 years after our founding extraordinary people, many who still work in Envestnet today, transformed an idea into a business, into a company that ultimately was traded on the New York Stock Exchange.
We accomplished a lot in our first 10 years.
During these past 10 years, we've experienced tremendous growth, both organically and through acquisition as we established investment as an industry leader.
We have work to do, but I am incredibly excited about what these next 10 years will bring for us.
