Let me begin with four important facts: first, our earnings per share was up 20%, which I'm sure you appreciate, is no small feat in this pandemic environment; second, we shipped an all-time record 2.2 million tons of cement during the quarter; third, we shipped the second quarter record 720 million square feet of Wallboard; and fourth, and most importantly, we achieved these results safely.
Cement volumes were up 23% for the quarter and up 28% for the fiscal year, reflecting the overall strength across all of our organic markets.
Our Wallboard shipments were up 6% this quarter and were up 6% for the fiscal year, a consistent trend.
Latest industry data showed industry shipments, up 1% for the quarter.
Second quarter revenue was a record $448 million, an increase of 12% from prior year.
This increase primarily reflects contribution from the Kosmos Cement Business, we acquired in March, and organic revenue improved 2%, reflecting increased Cement and Wallboard sales volume.
Second quarter earnings per share from continuing operations were $2.16, an improvement of 20%.
Revenue in this sector increased 15%, driven primarily by the addition of the recently acquired Kosmos Cement business.
Organic cement sales volume and prices improved 1% and 4%, respectively.
Operating earnings also increased 15%, again, reflecting the addition of the Kosmos Cement Business.
As we discussed last quarter, because of COVID-19, we delayed certain planned cement plant maintenance outages until our second quarter, which resulted in approximately $5 million of higher maintenance costs this quarter compared with the prior year period.
Second quarter revenue in our Wallboard and Paper business was up 1%, as improved sales volume was partially offset by lower Wallboard prices.
Quarterly operating earnings in this sector declined 1% to $48 million, again reflecting lower Wallboard sales prices, partially offset by increased volume.
During the first six months of the year, operating cash flow increased 94%, reflecting earnings growth, disciplined working capital management and the receipt of the majority of our IRS refund.
Capital spending declined to $41 million, and we continue to expect capital spending in the range of $60 million to $70 million for fiscal 2021.
At September 30, 2020, our net debt-to-cap ratio was 48% and our net debt-to-EBITDA leverage ratio was two times.
Total liquidity at the end of the quarter was over $700 million, and we have no near-term debt maturities.
