And I'm pleased to announce that we have appointed Tolani Azis, a six-year Fluor employee with 20 years of EPC experience, to lead our diversity, equity and inclusion efforts.
Currently, well over 90% of our project sites and about 80% of our offices are operating at limited operations or better.
Our 1,500 New Delhi employees are all now working safely and productively from home.
In the first quarter, our book-to-bill ratio was 1.25, with new awards led by the Dos Bocas in our Energy Solutions Group.
On April 5, we announced a $40 million equity contribution from JGC.
We know JGC well, having executed projects with them for more than 10 years.
In Energy Solutions, this quarter, our ICA Fluor joint venture was awarded three contracts totaling $2.8 billion for the PEMEX Dos Bocas refinery in Mexico.
We have a long and successful history of PEMEX contracts, and we are pleased to be adding our $1.4 billion share of this refinery program to backlog.
And as a result, we removed approximately $1 billion from backlog while slightly increasing Energy Solutions total backlog to $11.1 billion.
In infrastructure, we completed the handover for the 183 South Highway project outside of Austin, just a few miles from the Oak Hill Parkway project we booked in 2020.
We are currently completing FEED work that represents $20 billion of potential projects, and we see a robust pipeline of FEED and feasibility studies ahead of us.
As we have seen over the last 18 months, vaccine development is an integral part of our global economy, and facilities like this one will be essential going forward in protecting the population.
This reimbursable 12-month contract with two six-month options is valued at $690 million.
Peter is the last of a long line of family members to serve the company since our founding in 1912.
Joining the Board in 1984, he continued the Fluor family legacy of a commitment to excellence, integrity and ethics, always putting the safety and well-being of employees first and recognizing that teamwork is a key component of our success.
For the first quarter of 2021, we are reporting adjusted earnings per share of $0.07.
Our overall segment profit for the quarter was $60 million or 2% and includes the $29 million embedded derivative in Energy Solutions and quarterly NuScale expenses of $15 million.
This compares favorably to $55 million in the first quarter of 2020.
Removing NuScale expenses and the effect of the embedded derivative would improve our total segment profit margin to 3.6%.
As David mentioned, we received a $40 million investment in NuScale from JGC this quarter and are anticipating other significant investments in the near future.
Note here that even though partners are meeting NuScale's cash needs, we will continue to expense 100% of this investment on our income statement on a consolidated basis.
Our G&A expense in the quarter was $66 million.
We have identified cost savings above the $100 million target previously discussed.
On Slide 12, our ending cash for the quarter was $2 billion, 25% of this domestically available.
Our operating cash flow for the quarter was an outflow of $231 million and was negatively impacted by increased funding of COVID costs on our projects, higher cash payments of corporate G&A, including the timing and extent of employee bonuses, and increased tax payments.
We used approximately $50 million in cash for challenged legacy projects in the first quarter.
As I stated in February, we expect to spend an additional $65 million over the balance of 2021 to fund these projects.
As we announced earlier this week, we have divested our AMECO North America business for $73 million.
We are maintaining our adjusted earnings per share guidance of between $0.50 and $0.80 for the full year.
We are also maintaining our previous segment level guidance and expect 2021 full year segment margins to be approximately 2.5% to 3.5% in Energy Solutions, which excludes any fluctuation from the embedded foreign currency derivative; 2% to 3% in Urban Solutions; and 2.5% to 3% in Mission Solutions.
