Organic revenues this quarter were up 10.5%, adjusted EBITDA was up 30% and adjusted earnings per share of $0.66 was nearly doubled last year's first quarter.
As we reported last March, COVID-19 impacted our fiscal Q1 of 2020 only in China and by about $15 million in revenue, $4.5 million in EBITDA and $0.06 of EPS.
Excluding this impact, our revenues were up 8% organically, EBITDA was up 23% and earnings per share was up 65%, exceptional results.
EBITDA margin increased 190 basis points year-on-year.
However, we now expect year-on-year raw material inflation to be in the range of 5% to 8%.
H.B. Fuller has done a remarkable job in supporting customers through supply shortages and we also have implemented over $100 million in annualized price adjustments that are effective in Q2 and will enable us to continue to seamlessly serve our customers.
Hygiene, Health and Consumable Adhesives' first quarter organic sales increased 7.6% year-over-year, continuing the strong performance trend in this business unit in 2020.
HHC segment EBITDA margin was strong at 13.3%, up 180 basis points, margin improved versus last year, reflecting volume leverage, restructuring benefits and good expense management.
Construction Adhesives' organic revenue was down 10% versus last year as winter storm Uri, extreme weather and material supply issues across much of the United States impacted construction activity as we started the year.
Engineering Adhesive results were extremely strong with organic revenue up 21% versus last year, reflecting share gains and improving end market demand.
Engineering Adhesives' EBITDA margins were strong at 15.4%, up 300 basis points compared with Q1 last year, reflecting strong volume leverage and good expense management.
Net revenue was up 12.3% versus same period last year.
Currency had a positive impact of 1.8%.
Adjusting for currency, organic revenue was up 10.5% with volume accounting for all of the growth.
Year-on-year adjusted gross profit margin was 26.7%, up 20 basis points versus last year, driven by the higher volume.
Adjusted selling, general and administrative expense was up 2.9% versus last year.
SG&A was down 170 basis points as a percentage of revenue, reflecting savings associated with our business reorganization, lower travel expense, general cost controls, offset by higher variable comp than last year.
Net other income increased by $3 million versus last year, driven primarily by increased income on pension assets.
Net interest expense declined by $2 million, reflecting lower debt balances.
The adjusted effective income tax rate in the quarter was 27.5%, up 180 basis points versus the adjusted tax rate in the first quarter last year, driven primarily by mix of income and tax related to the global cash strategies.
Adjusted EBITDA for the quarter of $101 million is 30% higher than the same period last year, driven by strong top-line growth, particularly in Engineering Adhesives, restructuring savings and good cost management, partially offset by higher variable compensation.
Adjusted earnings per share was $0.66, up 94% versus the first quarter of last year, reflecting strong operating income growth and lower interest expense associated with our debt reduction.
Cash flow from operations in the quarter of $36 million was up from last year, reflecting strong income growth, partly offset by higher working capital requirements to support the strong top-line performance.
We continue to reduce debt paying down $16 million in the quarter compared to $6 million during the same period last year.
Regarding our outlook, based on what we know today and the planning assumptions that Jim laid out earlier, we anticipate revenue to be up high single-digits to low double-digits versus 2020 and EBITDA to be between $455 million and $475 million as continued strong volume growth and pricing actions offset higher raw material costs.
We expect cash flow to be strong for the rest of the year, allowing us to maintain our target to pay down approximately $200 million of debt during 2021.
We will also deliver an additional $200 million of debt reduction in 2021, moving the company closer to our net debt target of 2 to 3 times EBITDA.
