Orders were robust, up 42%, with growth in all segments in both services and equipment, reflecting continued demand for our technology and solutions and better commercial execution.
We saw a continued strength in services, up 7% organically.
Equipment was down 9% organically, largely due to supply chain disruptions, the Ford ventilator comparison in healthcare, and as expected, lower power equipment.
Adjusted Industrial margin expanded 270 basis points organically, largely driven by operational improvement in many of our businesses, growth in higher-margin services at Aviation and Power, and net restructuring benefits.
Industrial free cash flow was up $1.8 billion ex discontinued factoring programs due to better earnings, working capital, and the short-term favorable timing impact of aircraft delivery delays.
Departure trends are better than the August dip and have recovered to down 23% of '19 levels.
For example, at Aviation's overhaul shops, our teams have used lean to increase turnaround time by nearly 10% and decrease shop inventory levels by 15% since the fourth quarter of 2020.
The team used value stream mapping, standard work and quarterly Kaizens to reduce production lead time once parts are received by more than 40% from a year ago.
And there's line of sight there to another 25% reduction by the end of the year.
We'll use the proceeds to further reduce debt, which we now expect to reach approximately $75 billion since the end of 2018.
This quarter, we hosted our global Kaizen week in each of our businesses, with over 1,600 employees participating.
There are many recent wins across GE this quarter, but to highlight one, our Gas Power team delivered, installed, and commissioned four TM2500 aeroderivative gas turbines in only 42 days to complement renewable power generation for California's Department of Water Resources during peak demand season.
For example, at renewables, our Haliade-X offshore wind turbine prototype operating in the Netherlands, set an industry record by operating at 14 megawatts, more output than has ever been produced by any wind turbine.
Not only does BK expand our high-performing $3 billion Ultrasound business, but it also is growing rapidly with attractive margins itself.
In addition to Kaizen week that Larry mentioned, over 1,800 finance team members completed a full waste work week, applying lean and digital tools to reduce nonvalue-added work by 26,000 hours and counting.
Orders were robust, up 42% year over year and up 21% sequentially on a reported basis, building on revenue momentum heading into '22.
Year over year, total margins expanded 270 basis points, driven by our lean efforts, cost productivity, and services growth.
Finally, adjusted earnings per share was up 50% year over year, driven by Industrial.
However, due to our continued improvement across GE, we are raising our '21 outlook for organic margin expansion to 350 basis points or more and our adjusted earnings per share to a range of $1.80 to $2.10.
Industrial free cash flow was up $1.8 billion ex discontinued factoring programs in both years.
Receivables were a source of cash, up $1.3 billion year over year ex the impact of discontinued factoring, mainly driven by Gas Power collections.
Overall, strengthening our operational muscles in billings and collections is translating into DSO improvement, as evidenced by our total DSO, which is down 13 days year over year.
Also positively impacting our free cash flow by about $0.5 billion in the quarter was AD&A.
Given the year-to-date impact and our fourth quarter estimate aligned with the current airframer aircraft delivery schedule, we now expect positive flow in '21, about $300 million, which is $700 million better than our prior outlook.
This year's benefit will reverse in 2022, and together with higher aircraft delivery schedule expectations, will drive an outflow of approximately $1.2 billion next year.
In the quarter, discontinued factoring impact was just under $400 million, which was adjusted out of free cash flow.
The fourth quarter impact should be under $0.5 billion, bringing our full-year factoring adjustment to approximately $3.5 billion.
Leveraging problem solving and value stream mapping, they have reduced average billing cycle time by 30% so far.
Year to date, ex discontinuing factoring across all quarters, free cash flow increased $4.8 billion year over year.
Taking the strong year-to-date performance, coupled with the headwinds we've described, we're narrowing our full-year free cash flow range to $3.75 billion to $4.75 billion.
This strategic transaction not only deepens our focus on our industrial core, but also enables us to accelerate our debt reduction, with approximately $30 billion in consideration.
Given our deleveraging progress and cash flow improvement to date, plus our expected actions and better pass-through performance, we now expect a total reduction of approximately $75 billion since the end of 2018.
GE will receive a 46% equity stake in one of the world's leading aviation lessors, which we will monetize as the aviation industry continues to recover.
On liquidity, we ended the quarter with $25 billion of cash.
We continued to see significant improvement in lowering GE's cash needs, currently at $11 billion, down from $13 billion in the quarter, taking this decrease due to reduced factoring and better working capital management.
Military orders were also up, reflecting a large Hindustan Aeronautics order for nearly 100 F404 engines along with multiple T700 orders.
Shop visit volume was up over 40% year over year and double-digits sequentially, with the overall scope slightly improved.
Against that backdrop, orders were up double-digits, both year and versus '19, with strength in Healthcare Systems up 20% year over year, and PDx up high single-digits.
You'll recall that last year, the Ford ventilator partnership was about $300 million of Life Care Solutions revenue.
Even with the supply chain challenges, we now expect to deliver close to 100 basis point of margin expansion as we proactively manage sourcing and logistics.
Based on the latest WoodMac forecast for equipment and repower, the market is now expected to decline from 14 gigawatts of wind installments this year to approximately 10 gigawatts in 2022.
Segment margin declined 250 basis points.
For the year, we expect about 60 unit orders, up more than five times year over year.
Consistent with our strategy, we are on track to achieve about 30% turnkey revenue as a percentage of heavy-duty equipment revenue this year, down from 55% in 2019, a better risk-return equation.
At the same time, Gas Power shipped 11 more units year over year.
And by year-end, we expect our equipment backlog to be less than $1 billion compared to $3 billion a year ago.
At Insurance, we generated $360 million net income year to date, driven by positive investment results and claims still favorable to pre-COVID levels.
Based on our year-to-date performance, Capital still expects a loss of approximately $500 million for the year.
In discontinued operations, Capital reported a gain of about $600 million, primarily due to the recent increase in AerCap stock price, which is updated quarterly.
We are now expecting Corporate costs to be about $1 billion for the year, and this is better than our prior $1.2 billion to $1.3 billion guidance.
We just wrapped up our annual strategic reviews with nearly 30 of our business units.
We're positioned to truly shape the future of flight with new technology for sustainability and efficiency, such as the recent Catalyst engine launch, the first clean sheet turboprop design entering the business in general aviation market in 50 years.
