We generated 9% year-over-year revenue growth in the third quarter or 8% excluding the impact of acquisitions.
This is a substantial improvement from the second quarter 6% year-over-year revenue decline.
Orders increased 13% year-over-year and consistent with most new home construction and remodeling indicators, order growth remains strong throughout the quarter.
We 're competing better than ever in this space and we continue to drive strong financial returns with third quarter operating margins expanding 270 basis points year-over-year to a third quarter record of 19.6%.
In general, customers remain in a holding pattern and third quarter revenue was down 27% year-over-year.
However, the segment still was able to generate a profit of nearly $17 million in the quarter.
Orders in Workplace Furnishings excluding eCommerce declined 25% year-over-year in the third quarter.
This was an improvement from the 35% order decline in the second quarter.
Orders in our Workplace Furnishings eCommerce business increased 35% year-over-year in the third quarter.
We reported a decremental margin of 19% in the third quarter.
This is better than our previously communicated target of 25%.
Also recall, we were up against a strong prior-year comp in the third quarter as our productivity efforts and cost management drove a 50% incremental margin in the third quarter of 2019.
And third, our fiscal calendar has an extra week this year, which we expect will add 4 percentage points to 7 percentage points of growth to the quarter.
For the full year, we expect decrementals to be less than 20%.
We continue to target decremental margins of 25% over time.
As a result, our free cash flow through the first three quarters is tracking 70% ahead of prior prior year levels despite lower profitability.
We ended the quarter with $109 million of cash in the balance sheet.
We've reduced our net debt by 65% or nearly $123 million and our gross leverage ratio is 0.9, well below our debt covenant of 3.5.
Our unique vertically integrated model with more than 20% of revenue coming from our owned [Phonetic] installing distributors along with our recent success in managing through the spike in demand surrounding the pandemic puts us in a strong position as we move into 2021.
We have not cut our dividend in over 65 years of paying it.
