TSA data shows the beginning in mid-September, we have seen consecutive weeks of more than 12 million travelers.
And if you zoom in on our markets, New York City, Boston, Philadelphia, San Jose and Washington, D.C., have all seen a rebound over the last few weeks of at least 7.5% in air travel.
Additionally, Uber recently reported a 15% increase in airport rides during the last two weeks of September.
In New York, weekday ridership of trains and subways have each increased about 30% since the end of August.
While Times Square foot traffic reached a record high since the start of the pandemic with 270,000 people visiting last Saturday, 80% higher than the same day in 2020.
JetBlue said it had seen a 5 times increase in bookings to the U.S. from the U.K., while American noted it expects international revenues to surpass 2019 levels in December and throughout 2022.
On the hotel booking front, many OTAs have noticed an uptick of almost 20% international bookings in the week since the announcement in major feeder markets like New York City.
We began the third quarter on strong footing as our portfolio RevPAR ended July near $150, approximately 15% higher than June as peak summer travel translated into robust results across the portfolio.
Despite the occupancy decline, our revenue managers continued their strategy of holding rates, resulting in our comparable portfolio ADR for the quarter coming in only 1% below third quarter 2019.
Our resorts portfolio was strong again this quarter as the group generated weighted average occupancy of 68% and ADR growth of 30%, leading to weighted average RevPAR growth of 20% compared to the third quarter 2019.
The Parrot Key Hotel and Villas was our best-performing asset during the third quarter from a RevPAR growth perspective as 71% occupancy and a $409 average daily rate resulted in a $290 RevPAR, which surpassed third quarter 2019 RevPAR by 73%.
Even in the more business-oriented submarket of Coconut Grove, we were able to drive 36% ADR growth during the quarter as we captured local business from a variety of industries, law, universities, financial services, consulting, technology, healthcare and advertising, which is leading to stronger weekday demand post-Labor Day.
Out in California, the Sanctuary Beach Resort continues to lead our resorts from a rate perspective as a $669 ADR and 78% occupancy resulted in 30% RevPAR growth versus the third quarter of 2019.
The Our Hotel Milo in Santa Barbara reported 22% RevPAR growth this quarter, recording 75% occupancy at a $446 average daily rate.
We recorded an 86% occupancy and an average daily rate of $332 last quarter, which led to a 24% RevPAR growth over the period.
But our core urban portfolio, 75% of our rooms has also seen a steady demand increase over the last several months.
Weekday ADRs in our urban portfolio exceeded $195 in July, surpassed $200 in August and ended September at approximately $225, 15% higher than July.
From June to September, our urban portfolio saw a 7.5% CAGR in weekday RevPAR, supported by notable increases in both rate and occupancy.
As the month-to-date ADRs in October are higher than the same time in September, with occupancy up approximately 650 basis points to 54%.
This performance has led to substantial weekday RevPAR growth over the last 30 days as RevPAR for our urban portfolio is up 15%, with increased demand across each of our major northeastern cities.
Our urban luxury hotels have enjoyed meaningful rate growth across the last several months, as the Rittenhouse Hotel in Philadelphia and the Ritz-Carlton in Georgetown, outperformed our third quarter 2019 ADRs by 17% and 7%, respectively.
Although many of the world's largest corporations have postponed their return to office plans, third-party data providers indicate that major cities like Boston and New York saw a 30% month-over-month increase in workers returning to the office in September.
Although we have seen new hotels open again this year with more on pace to open over the next 12 months, it is important to note that many hotels have permanently closed.
Based on our internal projections as well as some recent third-party studies, it is estimated that 10,000 keys may be removed from inventory for the foreseeable future, if not permanently by way of demolition, resizing or alternate use conversions.
When we factor in this in the analysis and the aforementioned new supply, net supply over the next few years will actually be negative 1% to 2%.
Since inception, we have saved over $20 million from energy efficiency initiatives that generate recurring savings year-over-year and help to alleviate expense growth and improve margins, vital over the past 18 months as we navigated the COVID crisis.
We have reduced energy use per square foot by 15% and greenhouse gas emissions by 44% since 2010.
And we announced our 2030 targets in our robust annual report on our website, disclosures that contributed to Hersha ranking #1 among our U.S. hotel peer set in the Global Real Estate Sustainability Benchmark public disclosure for the second year in a row.
And this will present a major inflection point for our hotels, with 75% of our rooms situated in major gateway cities.
During the third quarter, 31 of our 33 hotels were cash flow positive, a 21% increase versus the second quarter.
These factors allowed our portfolio to generate $25.4 million in property level earnings and $4.5 million of positive corporate cash flow after all corporate expenses, debt service and the payment of dividends on all tranches of our preferred equity.
The asset management initiatives we've implemented over the past 18 months, combined with our flexible operating model and continued top line improvement showed early signs that our margin expansion goal through the recovery is moving in the right direction.
As GOP margins of 45% during the third quarter were in line with the forecast we outlined on our July earnings call and approximately 100 basis points higher than our third quarter 2019 GOP margin.
On the EBITDA line, we witnessed sustained margin improvement as our comparable hotel EBITDA margin of 30% and was 360 basis points higher than the second quarter 2021 and just 230 basis points lower than third quarter of 2019.
From a profitability perspective, our resort portfolio continued to deliver meaningful EBITDA margin performance as the group ended the third quarter with a weighted average EBITDA margin of 38%, 1400 basis points higher than the third quarter 2019.
Results out west were highlighted by our Sanctuary Beach Resort in Hotel Milo as both finished the quarter with a 50% EBITDA margin.
In South Florida, the Parrot Key and Cadillac each surpassed their third quarter 2019 EBITDA margin by at least 1,800 basis points while the Annapolis Waterfront Hotel aided by a strong end to the summer, recorded a 55% EBITDA margin, the highest margin in our comparable portfolio last quarter.
Over the past 18 months, we've been able to run our properties on a lean staffing model with occupancies between 35% and 60% at many of our hotels.
And over that period, we have seen a 44% rise in applicants for new posting with total hires in September, up 12% versus August following the expiration of additional unemployment benefits.
Over the last two years, we have absorbed 10% to 15% wage growth in each of our markets.
But despite this increase, our total cost per occupied room remains approximately 15% below pre-pandemic levels, with total nonmanagement contracted labor 40% below the same time in 2019.
This provides us confidence in our ability to forecast post-pandemic EBITDA margin growth as our ability to drive ADR in tandem with applied expense savings initiatives, provides us continued confidence in our ability to generate 150 to 250 basis points of sustainable long-term margin savings for the portfolio.
This was led by the Envoy in Boston, which generated $3.6 million in food and beverage revenues, 80% higher than the second quarter.
The hotel's very popular Lookout Rooftop Bar was the primary driver of profit again this quarter, generating $2.4 million in revenues from beverage sales.
Meanwhile, down in Key West, revenue generated from the food and beverage outlets at our Parrot Key Resort was 48% higher than the third quarter of 2019.
We ended the third quarter with $83.7 million in cash and cash equivalents and deposits.
In September, we successfully refinanced the $23 million mortgage loan on the St. Gregory Hotel, eliminating all debt maturities until third quarter 2022.
As of September 30, 78% of our debt is fixed or swapped with our total debt weighted average interest rate of 4.41% and 2.9 years life-to-maturity.
During the quarter, we spent $2.6 million on capital projects, and we continue to limit our capital expenditures strictly to maintenance and life safety renovation.
Year-to-date, we have spent $7.9 million on capital projects, and we anticipate our full year Capex load to be more than 50% below our 2020 spend.
Month-to-date in October, we continue to see incremental growth across our portfolio, but especially in our urban markets, which are running close to 10% ahead of forecast.
The largest outperformance from an occupancy perspective has been our Boston portfolio, which is currently running at a 77% occupancy month-to-date up approximately 1,800 basis points from September.
Our Manhattan portfolio occupancy is approaching 70%, 1,200 basis points higher than September.
While our Philadelphia and Washington, D.C. clusters are above 60% occupancy month to date.
From a revenue perspective, our Philadelphia and Manhattan hotels are surpassing initial forecast by 15% and 12%, respectively, while our Boston and D.C. portfolios are exceeding revenue forecast, by approximately 8% thus far in October.
