For the third quarter, Hilltop reported net income of $93 million or $1.15 per diluted share.
Return on average assets for the period was 2.1% and return on average equity was 15%.
PlainsCapital Bank had another strong quarter with pre-tax income of $63 million and a return on average assets of 1.4%.
Income during the period included $4.6 million of PPP loan-related origination fees and a $5.8 million reversal of provision.
Total average bank loans declined $252 million or 4% versus Q2 2021 as PPP balances ran off.
Total average deposits remain stable linked-quarter with average deposits excluding broker deposits increasing by $200 million or 2% from Q2 2021 and $1.9 billion or 16% from prior year.
We continue to see growth in both interest bearing and non-interest-bearing accounts since Q3 2020 we have run off almost $1 billion in broker deposits.
This was another strong quarter for PrimeLending generating $62 million in pre-tax income.
PrimeLending originated $5.6 billion in volume in the quarter from its continued strength in home purchase volume.
Refinancing volume as a percent of total volume decreased to 29% from 35% during the same period in 2020.
Gain on sale margin of loans sold to third parties declined by 17 basis points linked-quarter to the 359 basis points.
PrimeLending continues to recruit productive loan officers and has hired 127 year to date bringing total loan officer headcount to 1,314.
During the quarter, HilltopSecurities generated $17.4 million of pre-tax income on net revenues of $127 million or a pre-tax margin of 13.8%.
This was a good quarter for the public finance business in particular with revenues up $12 million from prior year, predominantly from a few larger deals.
Revenues within the structured finance business decreased by $26 million from last year as the overall mortgage market has declined from the astonishing levels in 2020.
From a historical average perspective, volumes are still strong and revenues rebounded by $24 million linked quarter.
Moving to page 4, as a result of strong and diversified earnings, we continue to grow our tangible book value while returning capital to shareholders.
Our capital levels remain very strong with the common equity Tier 1 capital ratio of 21.3% at quarter end, and we have grown our tangible book value per share by 18% over the last quarter to $27.77.
During the quarter, Hilltop returned $84 million to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases.
The $74 million in shares repurchased are part of the $150 million share authorization the board granted earlier this year.
This week, the Hilltop Board of Directors authorized an additional increase to the stock repurchase program of $50 million, bringing the total authorization to $200 million.
As a result of dividends and share repurchase efforts, Hilltop has returned $153 million in capital to shareholders year-to-date.
Additionally, we paid down $67 million in trust preferred securities during the quarter, which will reduce our annual interest expense by over $2 million going forward.
I'll start on page 5.
As Jeremy discussed, for the third quarter of 2021, Hilltop recorded consolidated income attributable to common stockholders of $93 million, equating to $1.15 per diluted share.
Included in the third quarter results was a net reversal of provision for credit losses of $5.8 million.
On page 6, we have detailed the significant drivers to the change in allowance for credit losses for the period.
As said, the S7 scenario did improve from the prior period, and the impact of the improvement resulted in the release of $6 million of credit reserves during the third quarter.
Further, the portfolio of loans that are currently under active deferral plan build a $17 million from $76 million at the end of the second quarter of '21.
The result of the improvements at the client level equated to a net release of credit reserves of $5 million during the third quarter.
The net impact of these changes resulted in an allowance for credit losses for the period ending September 30 of $109.5 million or 1.45% of total loans.
Further, the coverage ratio of ACL to total loans increases from 1.74% from loans that we believe have lower loss potential, including PPP broker-dealer and mortgage warehouse loans are excluded.
I'm moving to page 7.
Net interest income in the third quarter equated to $105 million, including $8.3 million of PPP-related interest and fee income, as well as purchase accounting accretion.
Somewhat offsetting these items were higher loans held for sale yield, resulting from higher overall mortgage rates, coupled with lower interest-bearing deposit cost, which have continued to trend lower finishing the quarter down 4 basis points versus the second quarter of '21 at 28 basis points.
As it relates to asset yields, the current competitive environment for commercial loans is resulting in substantial pressure on loan yields for new originations, which were 3.8% during the third quarter and is also challenging our ability to maintain current loan flow rates.
Given overall market and competitive conditions, we expect that NIM will remain pressured into the fourth quarter of '21 moving lower to between 240 basis points and 250 basis points by year end.
Turning to page 8, total non-interest income for the third quarter of '21 equated to $368 million.
Third quarter mortgage-related income and fees decreased by $114 million versus the third quarter of 2020 driven by lower origination volumes, declining gain on sale margins, and lower locked volumes.
As it relates to gain on sale margins, we noted in our key driver table in the lower right of the page the gain on sale margins on loans fell 18 basis points versus the prior quarter.
Further, we are providing the impact of gain on sale margin related to those loans that have been retained on the balance sheet, which for the third quarter equated to 13 basis points.
During the third quarter of 2021, the environment in mortgage banking remained resilient and is expected to continue to shift to a more purchase mortgage-centric marketplace with approximately 71% of our origination volumes serving as purchase mortgages.
During the third quarter, purchase mortgage volumes declined modestly to 3.95 billion, while refinance volumes declined 12% or $235 million versus the second quarter origination levels.
We expect this trend to continue for the more purchase-centric mortgage market over the coming quarters, and we continue to expect the gain on sale margins for the third-party sales will fall within a full year average range of 360 basis points to 385 basis points.
In addition, other income declined by $36 million, driven primarily by declines in TBA locked volumes, coupled with lower volumes and market depth in the fixed-income capital markets.
Lastly, our public finance and retail brokerage businesses at the broker-dealer drove solid revenue growth as highlighted in the securities-related fee growth of $15 million versus the prior-year period.
Turning to page 9, non-interest expenses decreased from the same period in the prior year by $44 million to $355 million.
The decline in expenses versus the prior year was driven by decline in variable compensation of approximately $35 million at HilltopSecurities and PrimeLending.
The bank continues to deliver improved efficiency, as highlighted in the sub-50% efficiency ratio.
As we've noted in the past, we expect that over the longer term, the efficiency ratio at the bank will fall within a range of 50% to 55%.
Moving to page 10, in the period, HFI loans equated to $7.6 billion, relatively stable with the second quarter levels.
We continue to expect that full year 2021 average total loan growth excluding PPP loans will be within a range of zero to 3%.
During the third quarter of '21, PrimeLending locked approximately $243 million of loans to be retained by PlainsCapital over the coming months.
These loans had an average yield of 2.95% and average FICO and LTV of 776% and 64%, respectively.
Moving to page 11, third quarter credit trends continue to reflect the slow but steady recovery in the Texas economy, which is supporting improved customer cash flows and fewer borrowers on active deferral programs.
As of September 30, we have approximately $17 million of loans on active deferral programs down from $76 million at June 30.
Further, the allowance for credit losses to period end loan ratio for the active deferral loans equates to 22.8% at September 30.
As is show on the graph at the bottom right of the page, the allowance for credit loss coverage including both mortgage warehouse lending as well as PPP loans at the bank ended the third quarter at 1.58%.
Excluding mortgage warehouse and PPP loans, the bank's ACL to end-of-period loans HFI ratio equated to 1.74%.
Tuning to page 12, third quarter end-of-period total deposits were approximately $12.1 billion, increasing by $398 million versus the second quarter of 2021.
At 09/30, Hilltop maintained $243 million of broker deposits that have a blended yield of 33 basis points.
Turning to page 13, in 2021, we continue to remain nimble as the pandemic evolves to ensure the safety of our teammates and our clients.
