Occupancy increased each month of the quarter peaking at 47% in September, which led to third quarter RevPAR of $47, a 63.5% decline year-over-year, but that was a significant improvement from the second quarter RevPAR of $23.
Market share gains were substantial, once again, in the third quarter as we finished with 151% RevPAR index, an increase of approximately 39 percentage points compared to the third quarter of last year and an 8 percentage point increase relative to last quarter.
Preliminary October results reflect a modest continuation of the improvements we experienced throughout the third quarter as October RevPAR is expected to finish at $50, with the highest ADR of any month since the onset of the crisis, running nearly $10 higher than the rates achieved in the second quarter.
Occupancy in October was over 47% across the total portfolio, more than 24 percentage points higher than the second quarter occupancy and flat to September, despite the strong Labor Day weekend results.
Excluding the five hotels that were either closed or consolidated into adjacent operations at various times during the quarter, occupancy was more than 50% in October.
Weekend occupancy was 56% during the third quarter as the relative outperformance compared to week day results accelerated each month during the quarter.
This led to weekend RevPAR that was 40% higher than our weekday RevPAR, primarily driven by occupancies that ran nearly 20 percentage points higher by the end of the quarter.
Weekend occupancy at our hotels located in markets we consider as drive-to was nearly 64% in the third quarter.
Our extended stay hotels which comprise nearly 25% of our total guest rooms were also relative outperformers again during the third quarter, finishing with occupancy of more than 63% and exceeded 60% in each month of the quarter while achieving a 51% RevPAR premium to our overall portfolio.
This trend continued as our preliminary October results indicate our extended stay hotels achieved 65% occupancy for the month.
Our suburban and airport hotels, which comprise more than a third of our portfolio guest rooms were also outperformance during the quarter, posting occupancies of 58% and 56% respectively, both increases of more than 20 percentage points from the second quarter results.
These hotels achieved RevPAR premiums of 27% and 29% respectively to the total portfolio in the quarter.
Urban hotels have continued to lag the industry recovery though occupancy increases for our portfolio during the quarter were in line with all other location types, finishing the quarter 20 percentage points higher than in the second quarter.
RevPAR growth at our urban hotels led the portfolio on a percentage increase basis relative to the second quarter, posting a nominal RevPAR 2.5 times higher than our urban portfolio's second quarter RevPAR.
We are currently averaging less than 14 FTEs per hotel compared to approximately 30 FTEs per hotel prior to the pandemic.
Finally, to preserve liquidity, we have continued to delay most nonessential capital expenditures for the remainder of 2020, along with common dividend distributions, which combined, preserved approximately $30 million in the third quarter and will preserve $30 million of cash for the balance of the year.
But with approximately $255 million of current liquidity and a manageable monthly cash burn rate that has been further reduced as our portfolio operating metrics have improved, we are well positioned to navigate the recovery.
In the third quarter, our hotel EBITDA retention across the portfolio was more than 47%, which resulted in hotel level profitability in each month of the quarter, positive adjusted EBITDA for the quarter, and a reduction of our corporate cash burn rate to an average of just over $5 million per month.
Commensurate with increases in RevPAR, our cash burn rate improved sequentially in each month of the third quarter and finished September at just $4.5 million, the lowest of any month since the onset of the pandemic.
This represents a significant improvement from the second quarter when our cash burn averaged $11 million on a monthly basis.
We currently have $225 million available on our revolving credit facility and approximately $30 million of unrestricted cash on hand which combined gives us $255 million of total liquidity.
Today, our weighted average interest rate is approximately 3.5% and weighted average term to maturity is approximately 3.3 years, with no maturities until November of 2022.
