As a result of the revenue growth, continued margin expansion and the effective deployment of the balance sheet, ITT delivered adjusted earnings per share of $0.99, growing 21% over the prior year.
We drove incremental productivity in the quarter, roughly 280 basis points through a combination of shop floor and sourcing actions, and we continue to apply strict controls over our fixed costs as growth resumes.
We thought to overcome a year-over-year $0.23 or 370 basis point raw material headwind.
Our ITTers delivered 60 basis points of adjusted segment operating margin expansion, an exceptional result, considering the supply chain dynamics we see.
We generated organic orders growth of 27% with strong demand in Friction aftermarket, rail, connectors and industrial controls.
Finally, we put our capital to work, repurchasing an additional $50 million of ITT shares to bring our year-to-date repurchases above $100 million, exceeding our repurchase commitment for the full year.
These accomplishments and the dedication of our ITTers drove adjusted earnings-per-share growth of over 20% compared to prior year and 2% above 2019 pre-pandemic levels.
This year, we have been awarded content on 25 new EV platforms and our win rate is significantly above our current global OE share of over 25%.
In Connect & Control Technologies, we drove 17% organic sales growth with strong demand in North America distribution, especially in the industrial market.
This, coupled with progress on CCT's operations, generated 17% adjusted segment margin for the quarter, putting the business closer to pre-pandemic levels.
Lastly, we generated 8% organic revenue growth in industrial process, driven by short-cycle demand across parts, valves and service.
One of the most telling metrics for ITT this quarter was the 27% organic orders growth.
Q3 was also the third consecutive quarter of sequential orders growth in projects with 36% organic order growth.
As a result, IP's backlog was up $28 million in the quarter.
In Connect & Control, orders grew over 40% organically, including an encouraging 70% orders growth in aerospace and the strong performance in North America distribution.
Even with these challenges, MT grew over 20% organically versus 2020 and 4% above 2019.
And for the year, we now expect MT to deliver over $1.3 billion in revenue, comfortably above 2019.
We now expect adjusted earnings per share in the range of $4.01 to $4.06 at the high end, which equates to 25% to 27% growth versus prior year.
This is a $0.06 improvement at the midpoint after a $0.37 increase through the first half of the year.
We are continuing to integrate ESG in our business strategy and the day-to-day operations of over 10,000 ITTers.
Some highlights from the report to note: we drove a 25% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, and a 23% reduction in waste sand to landfills, with 25% fewer workplace safety incidents.
Our capex for the year is approximately 3% of revenue through the third quarter.
From the inception of this initiative in 2018, we have commercialized more than 100 different pump models, representing 23% of our total product portfolio.
In addition, we completed redesign for more than 30 additional pumps ahead of their commercial release.
We have only begun to scratch the surface with more than 70% of the product offerings still to be addressed.
As an example of this effort, following the success of our BB2 pumps, our year-to-date order growth for our recently redesigned magnetic drive pump is 40%.
Regarding our other capital deployment priorities, we increased our dividend rate by 30% after 15% the year before.
This represents an annual dividend yield of approximately 1%.
Our share repurchases this quarter will drive a 1% reduction in our weighted average share count for the full year.
We will continue to drive repurchase activity in the future and our existing $500 million authorization.
In our OE business, Friction's market outperformance was over 1,000 basis points this quarter, significantly above our historical average despite large declines in global auto production levels.
For all of ITT, we estimate that the supply chain disruptions deducted approximately 350 basis points from our sales growth this quarter.
And similar to what we saw in Q2, demand in commercial aerospace is increasing as exhibited by the 70% growth in aerospace orders.
On segment margin, CCT grew margin by 300 basis points and IP by 150 basis points, while MT declined 110 basis points, mainly due to raw material inflation.
We overcame a 470 basis point inflation headwind to drive 60 basis points of adjusted segment margin expansion.
On adjusted EPS, despite the challenges Luca highlighted in his introduction, we drove a $0.42 operational improvement year-over-year through a combination of higher sales volumes, strategic pricing actions and productivity across the enterprise.
We achieved an adjusted trailing 12-month free cash flow margin of more than 11% this quarter, due to higher segment operating income.
Our year-over-year growth was significantly impacted by $0.23 headwind related to raw material inflation and a $0.09 headwind from prior year environmental settlements and temporary cost actions.
Partially offsetting these items was a roughly $0.04 benefit from foreign currency.
We also realized a slightly lower effective tax rate versus the prior year, which drove over a $0.02 benefit.
We now expect our full year effective tax rate to be approximately 20.75%.
Motion Technologies Q3 organic revenue growth of 20% was primarily driven by strength in the aftermarket as the Friction OE business declined slightly given the supply chain headwinds affecting OEMs. This and the raw material inflation also impacted operating margin as we had signaled last year -- last quarter.
However, as with last quarter, our Friction OE business executed very well with over 99% on-time performance across all Friction plants.
For Industrial Process, revenue was up 8% organically.
As we signaled last quarter, we see the project funnel continuing to grow and IP was able to capture a significant share as evidenced by the 36% organic order growth in project this quarter.
IP margin expanded 150 basis points to 15.6% with an incremental margin of 33%, this was driven by higher sales volume, favorable mix, given the higher proportion of short-cycle sales, productivity and price, partially offset by labor and material inflation as well as higher freight charges given shipping delays.
With incremental margin of 35%, CCT generated segment margin above 17%.
This is a 300 basis point improvement over prior year.
This margin profile is approaching pre-pandemic levels, but with approximately $20 million less in revenue.
Third, CCT orders were up 40% organically in -- on the strength of our connector portfolio, particularly in North America.
CCT backlog is up 17% organically or $40 million since year-end with a book-to-bill of 1.06.
Through two quarters we had raised our organic sales outlook by 600 basis points and adjusted earnings per share by $0.37 versus the midpoint of our original guidance.
Given our strong performance, today, we are again raising the midpoint of our adjusted earnings per share range by an additional $0.06 to reflect the stronger-than-anticipated results and lower tax rate.
Year-over-year we expect segment margin to grow approximately 50 to 75 basis points.
Lastly, we have deployed over 2.8 times our year-to-date adjusted free cash flow through our asbestos divestiture, dividends and share repurchases.
