Starting on slide three, I'm pleased to announce that we achieved constant currency net sales growth of 2.9% with increases in all key product categories despite continuing global supply chain challenges.
Turning to slide six, reported net sales increased 5.8% and constant currency net sales increased 2.9% in line with our quarterly guidance, and driven by growth in all key product categories, sales growth was the result of continued strong order intake, and the conversion of a portion of the excess backlog from the second quarter of 2021.
Gross profit increased $300,000 and benefited from net sales growth and favorable sales mix.
However, gross profit as a percentage of sales declined 140 basis points.
Operating loss excluding the goodwill impairment charge was $3.8 million, an improvement of $900,000 from the third quarter of 2020.
In the third quarter of '21, the company recorded a one-time non-cash charge related to an impairment for Goodwill of $28.6 million.
Adjusted EBITDA was $18.1 million, an increase of $8.3 million primarily attributable to $10.1 million of CARES Act benefit, and net sales growth partially offset by higher supply chain costs.
Excluding the CARES Act benefits, adjusted EBITDA for the third quarter was $8 million.
Free cash flow usage for the quarter reflects an investment in working capital, including $10.1 million of additional inventory as compared to the second quarter of '21.
On a consolidated basis, constant currency net sales of Lifestyle products grew 5.2% driven by exceptionally strong sales of manual wheelchairs and hygiene products in Europe.
Turning to slide eight, Europe constant currency net sales increased 4.5% driven by more than 17% growth in lifestyle products as a result of heightened demand for products that were readily available, demonstrating the importance of our targeted inventory strategy.
Gross profit increased $3.2 million, and gross margin increased 20 basis points driven by net sales growth and favorable product mix partially offset by higher freight costs and supply chain disruptions.
Operating income benefited from SG&A leverage and increased by $2 million, driven by higher gross profit from revenue growth.
Turning to slide nine, North America constant currency net sales decreased slightly, a 7% increase in mobility & seating and an over 6% increase in respiratory products was more than offset by lower sales of lifestyle products.
Gross profits declined by $2.8 million and gross margin declined 80 basis points due to unfavorable operating variances as a result of supply chain challenges, partially offset by favorable product mix.
Operating loss of $1.5 million was impacted by reduced gross profit and higher SG&A expense, the latter of which came primarily as a result of spending supporting revenue growth.
Turning to slide 10, constant currency net sales in the Asia Pacific region increased 17%, driven by significantly higher sales of respiratory products, and an over 15% increase in mobility & seating products.
Operating loss improved by $2.2 million, driven primarily by lower corporate SG&A expense, including reduced stock compensation expense.
Moving to slide 11, as of September 30, 2021, the company had total debt of $318 million, excluding financing and operating lease obligations, and $74 million of cash on the balance sheet.
As part of the company's strategy to mitigate supply chain challenges and to prepare for expected sales growth, the company added $10.1 million of incremental inventory in the quarter, which is expected to convert to cash over the next few quarters.
In the third quarter of 2021, the company received forgiveness of its CARES Act that obligation of $10.1 million of principal and accrued interest.
Turning to slide 12, we are reaffirming our full-year guidance for 2021 consisting of constant currency net sales growth in the range of minus 1% to positive 2%.
Adjusted EBITDA in the range of $30 million to $37 million, and free cash flow usage in the range of $10 million to $20 million.
