In the $10.5 billion backlog we have built, which increased 10% on a year-over-year basis.
Additionally, there are significant actions underway across the organization to optimize the efficiency of our cost structure, and we remain on track to deliver $230 million in productivity savings this year.
We received our eighth consecutive ranking in the Corporate Knights Global 100 most sustainable corporations in the world.
We were recognized by Sustainalytics for managing material ESG issues, and we are one of 45 companies globally to receive his Royal Highness, The Prince of Wales' inaugural Terra Carta Seal.
Overall, service revenues in the quarter were up 5% with broad-based growth across all regions.
Orders were up 7%, led by low double-digit growth in North America with strength across our applied commercial HVAC and fire & security platforms.
We expect a 400 to 500 basis point improvement in our attach rate for the full year and ended Q1 at approximately 41%.
We were pleased to see the recent announcement from the Biden administration forming a new National Building Performance Standards Coalition consisting of more than 30 state and local governments across the U.S., incentivizing the development of healthier, lower carbon emitting buildings.
The official adoption of these standards would represent an important step toward the formation of the $240 billion decarbonization industry, we expect through of 2035.
In North America, we are partnering with the University of Windsor on their 2030 carbon reduction plan as well as their 2050 carbon neutrality objectives.
Sales in the quarter were up 8% organically above our original guidance for mid-single-digit growth and led by strong outperformance across the global product portfolio.
Our longer-cycle field businesses also performed well, up 6% with solid growth in both service and install.
Segment EBITA increased 13% versus the prior year, with margins expanding 30 basis points to 12.3%, including a 100-basis-point margin headwind from price/cost and significant operational inefficiencies related to ongoing supply chain disruptions and worsening labor constraints.
Additionally, ongoing supply chain disruptions and labor shortages impacted our field operations, where we were dealing with, not only our own disruptions, but those of our customers as well versus our guidance for Q1, this was an incremental headwind of 40 basis points.
EPS of $0.54 was at the high end of our guidance range and increased 26% year over year, benefiting from higher profitability as well as lower share count.
Free cash flow in the quarter was just over $250 million, primarily the result of a continued focus on working capital management.
Overall operations contributed $0.10 versus the prior year, including a $0.06 benefit from our COGS and SG&A productivity programs.
Underlying segment earnings were a net $0.04 tailwind year over year, which we view as a significant achievement in the current environment.
Excluding the headwinds from price cost, underlying incremental in Q1 were approximately 40%.
Orders for our field businesses increased 8% in aggregate, with fairly balanced growth between service and install activity.
Backlog grew 10% to nearly $10.5 billion, with service backlog up 4% and installed backlog up 11%.
Sales in North America were up 5% organically, led by 7% growth in service.
Install sales increased 4%.
Performance Infrastructure declined high single digits, given the tough prior year comparison of plus 20%.
Segment margin decreased 90 basis points year over year to 11.6%, including an 80 basis point impact from lower absorption given the operational inefficiencies related to material and labor availability.
Orders in North America were up 11% versus the prior year with high teens growth in commercial applied, including a significant increase in HVAC equipment orders driven by very strong demand in the data center and healthcare verticals.
Backlog of $6.5 billion increased 12% year over year.
EMEALA revenue increased 3%, led by continued strength in the fire & security business, which grew at mid-single-digits rate in Q1.
Segment EBITDA margin expanded 50 basis points, underlying margin performance improved as positive price/cost and the benefit of SG&A.
Orders in EMEALA were up 3% in the quarter with high single-digit growth in fire & security and low single-digit growth in commercial HVAC.
Backlog ended the quarter at $2.2 billion, up 12%.
Sales in Asia Pacific increased 12% organically led by mid-teens growth in commercial HVAC in Controls.
China continued to outperform with revenue up nearly 30%.
EBITDA margin declined 260 basis points year over year to 10.1%, driven by headwinds from price costs as well as unfavorable business and geographic mix.
APAC orders were up 5% with continued strength in commercial HVAC, driven by a strong rebound within the industrial vertical in China as well as the benefit of a large infrastructure development project currently underway in Japan, which would include a significant deployment of OpenBlue and digitally enabled services.
Backlog of $1.8 billion was up 2% year over year.
Global product sales increased 14% organically in the quarter, with broad-based strength across the portfolio led by mid-teens growth across our HVAC equipment platforms.
Global residential HVAC sales were up 11% overall in Q1.
North America resi HVAC grew 17% in the quarter benefiting from both higher growth in our power business and strong price realization.
So far, we had about 30% capacity and still on track for full run rate later in the year.
Strength in light commercial was driven by strong performance at Hitachi which was up over 50% as well as mid-teens growth in North America unitary equipment and high single-digit growth in VRF.
EBITA margin expanded 240 basis points year over year to 14.5% as volume leverage, higher equity income and the benefit of productivity actions more than offset headwinds from price/cost.
Corporate expense was up slightly year over year to $70 million.
We ended up Q1 with $1.2 billion in available cash and net debt at 1.9 times, one tick higher versus year-end, but still below our target range of two to two and a half times.
On cash, we generated a little over $250 million in free cash flow in the quarter, down year over year due to the absence of prior year tax credits and other COVID-related benefits as well as nearly a 50% increase in capex spend year over year.
We had another quarter of strong trade working capital management, down 140 basis points as a percentage of sales.
With a continued focus on working capital, we remain confident that we will sustain 100% conversion over the next several years.
We repurchased approximately 7 million shares for just over $500 million, deploying roughly $100 million toward bolt-on acquisitions and increased our quarterly cash dividend payment by 26%.
As George mentioned, we are reaffirming our full year adjusted earnings per share guidance range of $3.22 to $3.32, which represents year-over-year growth of 22 to 25%.
Given the continued inflationary environment, we are increasing our organic revenue growth assumptions to a range of 8 to 10%, mainly driven by our increased price expectation.
An additional point of price on the topline we create an incremental margin headwind of approximately 20 basis points.
However, the inflated level of pricing will bring our full year price cost margin headwind to approximately 60 basis points.
Therefore, we now expect 50 to 60 basis points of segment EBITA margin expansion for the year.
There was no change to underlying margin expansion of 110 to 120 basis points.
Additionally, the strengthening U.S. dollar has created an earnings per share headwind of $0.03, since we first provided guidance back in November, and we are absorbing this incremental headwind with our reaffirmed adjusted earnings per share guidance range.
We expect continued strong performance with high single-digit organic revenue growth, improved segment EBITDA margin expansion and adjusted earnings per share of $0.62 to $0.64, which represents a year-over-year increase of 19 to 23%.
Antonella has been one of my constants, really, since I first joined back -- Tyco back in 2006.
