The passcode for both numbers is 137-21413.
Despite the increased working capital required by higher prices and volumes, we generated $1.9 billion of cash from operating activities.
As of the end of June, our year-to-date total recordable incident rate of 0.22 for employees and contractors remained in the top 10% of our industry.
Our aim is to learn from all incidents and achieve a goal 0 work environment that prevents such tragedies from occurring.
As of July, only 14% of the global population is fully vaccinated.
While the U.S. and roughly a dozen other countries have achieved vaccination rates approaching or exceeding 50%, health experts anticipate that vaccines will be rolling out to the rest of the world throughout 2022 and into 2023.
The Bureau of Economic Analysis estimates that U.S. personal savings averaged $3.5 trillion during the first five months of 2021, nearly three times the level seen in 2019.
One example is that the average age of an automobile in the U.S. reached an all-time high of 12 years in 2021.
Despite higher prices and supply chain constraints, demand for our products serving automotive manufacturing are forecast to increase a total of 10% in 2021 and an additional 11% during 2022.
In the second quarter, LyondellBasell generated $1.9 billion of cash from operating activities that contributed toward the more than $4 billion over the past 12 months.
Our free operating cash flow yield has been 10.1% over the past four quarters and free operating cash flow for the second quarter improved by more than 80% relative to the second quarter of 2019.
We expect continued improvement of our last 12 months cash flow performance as we move forward through each quarter of 2021.
In the second quarter, we expressed our confidence in our outlook by increasing the quarterly dividend by 7.6% to $1.13 per share.
We continue to invest in maintenance and growth projects during the quarter with approximately $430 million in capital expenditures.
Strong cash flow supported debt repayments of $1.3 billion, bringing our year-to-date debt reduction to $1.8 billion.
We closed the second quarter with cash and liquid investments of $1.5 billion.
We expect that robust cash generation and an anticipated tax refund will enable continued progress on our goal to reduce our net debt by up to $4 billion during 2021 and further strengthen our investment-grade balance sheet.
Our original full year net interest expense guidance of $430 million did not include extinguishment costs associated with our accelerated debt repayment program.
In the second quarter of 2021, LyondellBasell's business portfolio delivered record EBITDA of $3 billion.
This was an improvement of more than $1.4 billion relative to the first quarter.
Persistent consumer and industrial demand has met tight markets, leading to seven consecutive months of North American polyethylene contract price increases totaling more than $900 per ton.
Our previous quarterly EBITDA record set in the third quarter of 2015 was approximately $2.2 billion, with more than $140 million of EBITDA contributed by our Refining segment.
Strong demand, improved margins and our growth investments drove second quarter EBITDA to a record of $1.6 billion, $709 million higher than the first quarter.
Olefins results increased by approximately $310 million compared to the first quarter due to higher margins and volumes.
LyondellBasell's cracker operating rates increased to 93% and following the first quarter Texas weather events, about five points above the second quarter industry average.
Polyolefin results increased by about $400 million during the second quarter as robust demand in tight markets drove higher prices and margins for polyethylene and polypropylene.
Similar to the Americas, robust demand and improving margins in our EAI markets drove second quarter EBITDA to a record $708 million, $296 million higher than the first quarter.
Olefins results improved by $100 million as margins increased driven by higher ethylene and coproduct prices.
Demand was robust during the quarter, and we operated our crackers at a rate of 96%, more than 10% above industry benchmarks.
Combined polyolefin results increased approximately $180 million compared to the prior quarter.
Second quarter EBITDA was $596 million, more than three times higher than the prior quarter.
Second quarter propylene oxide and derivative results increased by $170 million driven by record high margins.
Intermediate Chemicals results increased by about $170 million, primarily due to higher product prices for most of the businesses.
Oxyfuels and related products results increased by $70 million, driven by higher margins, benefiting from improved demand and higher gasoline prices.
Total gasoline and distillate demand in June was within 5% of prepandemic levels.
Since the beginning of this year, global demand for gasoline and gasoline blending components such as MTBE and ETBE has improved, increasing the margin to an average of $167 per ton during the second quarter.
Second quarter EBITDA was $129 million, lower than the first quarter.
Compounding & Solutions results decreased by about $25 million as volumes decline for polymers supplied to the automotive sector appliance manufacturing and other industries that were constrained by chip shortages.
Advanced Polymer results increased by approximately $10 million due to improved polymer price spreads over propylene raw materials.
This resulted in second quarter EBITDA of negative $81 million, an improvement of $29 million relative to the first quarter of 2021.
In the second quarter, the Maya 2-1-1 benchmark increased by $6.14 per barrel to $21.46 per barrel.
The average crude throughput at the refinery increased to 248,000 barrels per day, an operating rate of 93%.
Increased licensing revenue was offset by a decline in Catalyst margin, resulting in a second EBITDA of $92 million, $2 million lower than the prior quarter.
As logistics constraints subside, and U.S. PG exports to Asia resume, producers will need to refill a depleted supply chain of 500,000 tons or more that is not fully captured in industry statistics.
In today's strong markets, our second quarter EBITDA results are 38% higher than our previous record.
By 2023, we expect that our recent growth investments will provide an additional $1.5 billion of mid-cycle EBITDA earnings capability relative to 2017.
