Our 40,000 restaurants in over 100 countries are predominantly run by local owner operators, connecting the business to the 40,000 communities in which we operate.
Our third quarter topline results represent a continuation of our broad-based business momentum around the world with global comp sales, up nearly 13% or 10% on a two-year basis.
Our International Operated Markets have continued to recover accelerating two-year comp trends in the third quarter to nearly 9% as most markets operated with fewer government restrictions.
In the US, we maintained our momentum with Q3 comp sales, up nearly 10% or 14.6% on a two-year basis.
In just a few short months, we already have over 1 million members enrolled with over 15 million active loyalty members earning rewards, and we expect that number to continue to grow.
We've reopened nearly 80% of our dining rooms in the US, roughly 3,000 dining rooms remain closed in high risk COVID areas, as we continue to prioritize the health and safety of our customers and crew.
Comp sales were up nearly 17% for the quarter, or about 5% on a two-year basis.
Japan maintained momentum in Q3 with comps, up 13% achieving an impressive six consecutive years of quarterly comp sales growth, despite restaurants operating with government restrictions.
While comps for the quarter were negative, the market continues to build its digital presence as they now have over 100 million active digital members.
In addition, we've accelerated new restaurant growth in China, with over 500 new restaurants already opened this year, we now expect to open roughly 650 restaurants for the year, exceeding our original plan.
In our top six markets over 20% of sales or about $13 billion year-to-date came through digital channels, whether it was through our app, kiosk in our restaurants or delivery.
Over the past five years, our delivery footprint has grown from just 3,000 of our restaurants to more than 32,000 restaurants across 100 countries.
Our strong performance for the quarter resulted in adjusted earnings per share of $2.76, which excludes the gain as we completed the partial divestiture of our ownership in McDonald's Japan.
Our strong sales generated an increase in restaurant margins of about $500 million for the quarter.
G&A increased about 20% in constant currencies for the quarter, driven by higher incentive-based compensation expense as a result of company performance exceeding our plan this year.
We still expect G&A to be about 2.4% of systemwide sales for the full-year.
Year-to-date adjusted operating margin was 44.3%, reflecting the improved restaurant margins across all segments and higher other operating income, compared to last year.
Foreign currency translation benefited Q3 results by $0.04 per share.
Based on current exchange rates, we expect currency to have a minimal impact on fourth quarter EPS, with an estimated full-year benefit of $0.21 to $0.23.
And finally in September, our Board of Directors approved a 7% dividend increase to the equivalent of $5.52 annually.
Among our goals were to sustainably source 100% of key ingredients, including coffee and beef.
Just this past September, we announced that we would reduce the use of conventional virgin plastics and Happy Meal Toys by 90% by 2025.
We recently announced our ambition to achieve net zero emissions across global operations by 2050 and we joined the UN Race to zero.
