In Q4, we saw growth of over 95%, which translates to 19% growth for the fiscal year.
We saw broad-based growth this quarter, led by North America at over 140%.
Greater China's currency-neutral growth of 9% was impacted amid marketplace dynamics with improving trends as we exited the quarter.
The apps augmented reality lenses featuring yoga, dance, and [Indecipherable] led to more than 600 million Gen Z impressions in just the first two weeks.
In Q4 sneakers grew over 90% in demand and saw nearly 80% growth in monthly active users.
For the full year, our women's business drove outsized growth of 22% versus the prior year.
Consumer insight from our female consumer drove the new Pegasus 38, which kept the best cushioning innovations from this popular franchise while improving and tailoring comfort and fit that she wants.
The Peg 38 has sold extremely well and we continue to be energized by the potential we see in footwear for her.
In fiscal '21, Jordan brand grew 31% propelling the business to nearly $5 billion.
This growth was driven by continued energy for Jordan's most coveted icons including the AJ1 and AJ11 as well as new product dimensions.
We are also increasingly are excited about our delivery of exclusive access for women through [Indecipherable] AJ1, which drove over 40% female buyers, more than 10 points higher than average AJ1 buyer profile.
In Q4, Jordan also launched Zion Williamson's first signature shoe, the Zion 1 as well as the apparel collection.
In running, this includes our Vaporfly NEXT% 2 for distance runners as well as our best-in-class track spikes.
As I said earlier, our owned digital business has more than doubled over the past few years to over $9 billion.
And at the center of our digital ecosystem is our suite of apps, which in Q4 reflected over 40% of our owned digital business.
In Q4, we continue to see growth and member demand outpace total digital growth hitting a new record of $3 billion.
In this fiscal year, we met the goals we set at our last Investor Day around membership of full year early and now have more than 300 million NIKE members.
The combination of owned and partner digital revenue is now nearly 35% of our total business, more than three years ahead of our prior plan.
In fact, we believe we will achieve 50% digital mix of business across owned and partnered in fiscal '25.
Over the past 15 months we have navigated through this challenging environment with outstanding execution of our operational playbook.
In the fourth quarter, we delivered over $12 billion of reported revenue, our largest quarter ever.
Our NIKE Direct business is now approaching 40% of total NIKE brand revenue.
NIKE Digital represents 21% of total NIKE brand revenue, a milestone we have reached several years ahead of our prior plan.
And finally, our fiscal '21 EBIT margin reached 15.5%, reflecting more than 300 basis points of expansion when compared to fiscal '19.
NIKE Inc. revenue increased 96% and 88% on a currency neutral basis.
Even as physical retail reopened, we continue to see strong growth in NIKE Digital of 37% versus the prior year.
Gross margin increased 850 basis points versus the prior year, driven by favorable NIKE Direct margins and the anniversary of higher costs including actions taken to manage supply and demand in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic.
SG&A grew 17% versus the prior year due to higher levels of brand activity connected to return of sport.
Our effective tax rate for the quarter was 18.6% compared to 1.7% for the same period last year due to decreased benefits from discrete items in the prior year and a shift in earnings mix primarily related to pandemic recovery.
Fourth quarter diluted earnings per share was $0.93 and full year diluted earnings per share was $3.56, up 123% versus the prior year.
In North America, Q4 revenue grew 141%.
This also marked the first ever $5 billion quarter for North America, driven by notable improvements in full price sell through as the marketplace reopened and sport activity returned.
NIKE Direct grew over 120% as NIKE owned stores returned to positive sales growth versus pre-pandemic levels.
More importantly, NIKE Digital grew over 50% while physical traffic continued to improve across the marketplace.
Member demand nearly doubled versus the prior year and the number of buying members grew roughly 80%.
NIKE owned inventory declined 7% with double-digit declines in closeout inventory.
In EMEA, Q4 revenue grew 107% on a currency neutral basis with strong growth across the region, including the UK and Ireland, France, Germany and Italy.
NIKE Direct grew 57% despite government restrictions requiring nearly half of our NIKE owned stores to remain closed for the first two months of the quarter.
NIKE Digital grew nearly 30% versus the prior year.
In the fourth quarter, we also expanded the NIKE mobile app to more than 10 new countries across the region.
In Greater China, Q4 revenue grew 9% on a currency neutral basis.
NIKE Direct grew 2% in Q4, with strong growth in NIKE owned stores, partially offset by declines in NIKE Digital.
And for the 6.18 consumer movement, our flagship store on Tmall ranked number one driving the highest demand across the sports industry.
Q4 revenue grew 76% on a currency neutral basis with growth across all territories led by Japan, SOKO and Mexico.
And Korea, grew double-digits this quarter on top of the 8% growth they delivered in the fourth quarter of last year.
NIKE Digital grew more than 50% enabled and amplified by our membership offense.
Earlier I mentioned NIKE Direct is approaching 40% of our brand business today.
And we expect it to represent approximately 60% of the business in fiscal '25, led by growth in digital.
And as John said earlier, we expect owned and partnered digital to achieve 50% business mix in fiscal '25 with NIKE own digital to represent 40% of the business.
Having said that we expect to invest in SG&A at a rate that drives leverage versus pre-pandemic levels, which averaged roughly 32% to 33% of revenue.
We expect to deliver strong growth in free cash flow, maintain annual capital expenditures at roughly 3% of revenue, drive returns on invested capital above prior guidance at the low 30% range.
In fiscal '22, we expect revenue to grow low double digits and surpassed $50 billion, reflecting strong consumer demand across our operating segments, as we lead with digital, scale NIKE owned physical retail concepts and grow with our strategic partners.
We expect gross margin to expand 125 basis points to 150 basis points, reflecting our continued shift to a more profitable NIKE Direct business and sustained strong full price realization, partially offset by higher product costs, supply chain investments and the annualization of certain one-time benefits in fiscal '21.
Foreign exchange is estimated to be a tailwind of roughly 70 basis points.
