And we are now in a much stronger competitive position today than we were 18 months ago, and that trend continues.
Our brands' deep connection with the consumer is driving strong holiday sales, most notably with North American Digital leading the industry over Black Friday week, with close to 40% growth.
And our Singles Day performance showcased our brand strength in greater China as we added 13 million new members, and Nike was again the number one sport brand on TMall.
Following the exciting end of the WNBA and MLB seasons, the energy around sport continues with the NBA, NFL, European soccer and upcoming college football bowl season, where 16 of the top 20 teams and three out of the four Playoff participants are Nike teams.
And congratulations to Cristiano Ronaldo for reaching yet another remarkable milestone by becoming the first player in recorded history to score 800 career goals in official matches.
This continues the progress made by our Cosmic Unity sustainable basketball shoe by reaching more than 50% total recycled content by weight.
Megan's content drove record high engagement, drawing 2 times increase in daily active users in NTC, and her curated looks saw more than double the demand, compared to any other product content viewed during that same time period.
As a result, the Nike Flagship store on TMall was the number one brand for new member recruitment across sport, driving a 20 point increase in member demand penetration this year.
As a result, our consumer engagement is 3 times the industry average for livestreams.
Nike's second quarter financial results were in line with the expectations we established 90 days ago, fueled by continued Brand momentum, the strength of our product franchises with extraordinary levels of full price realization, and strong season-to-date Holiday sales, offset by lower levels of available inventory supply relative to marketplace demand.
As John mentioned, we had an incredible Black Friday week with Nike Direct in North America and EMEA increasing over 20% versus the prior year, on top of last year's meaningful gains.
As of today, all factories are operational and employee attendance rates have improved, with weekly footwear and apparel production now at roughly 80% of pre-closure volumes.
In total, Vietnam factory closures caused us to cancel production of roughly 130 million units due to three months of lost production volume and several months to ramp back to full production.
Nike Digital grew 11% in the quarter, on a currency neutral basis, setting the pace for the industry.
Nike Digital is now 25% of total NIKE Brand revenue, up 3 points versus the prior year and more than double the digital mix in fiscal '19.
Member engagement grew 27% and repeat buyers grew 50% versus last year, driving overall higher AUR, AOV and member buying frequency.
40% of total digital demand this year is coming from our mobile apps, highlighting the strength of our digital platform.
We now have over 79 million engaged members across our Nike ecosystem.
Over the past four years, North America has reduced the number of wholesale accounts by roughly 50%, while delivering strong growth and recapturing consumer demand through Nike Direct and our strategic wholesale partners leading the way for Nike.
In the second quarter, North America Digital grew 40% versus the prior year, pushing Nike Digital to 30% of total North America marketplace, bringing Nike Direct to 48% of total.
On automation, we have added more than 1,000 robots in our distribution centers to handle the digital growth.
In our digital distribution center in Memphis, robots handled more than 10 million units that would have otherwise required manual labor.
NIKE, Inc. revenue grew 1% and was flat on a currency neutral basis, led by 8% growth in Nike Direct offset by a 6% decline in wholesale, due to optimization of available inventory supply.
Nike Digital grew 11% and Nike-owned stores grew 4% with significant improvements in traffic and higher conversion rates.
Gross Margin increased 280 basis points versus the prior year, driven primarily by higher Nike Direct margins due to lower markdowns, higher full price mix and foreign currency exchange rates, partially offset by increased freight and logistics costs.
SG&A grew 15% versus the prior year primarily due to normalization of spend against brand campaigns, digital marketing investments to support heightened digital demand, strategic technology investments and wage related expenses.
Our effective tax rate for the quarter was 10.9% compared to 14.1% for the same period last year.
Second quarter diluted earnings per share was $0.83, up 6% versus the prior year.
In North America, Q2 revenue grew 12% and EBIT grew 21%.
Nike Direct had an outstanding quarter, growing 30% versus the prior year.
As I mentioned earlier, Digital maintained its momentum growing 40% and setting holiday records on Black Friday week.
Despite strong retail sales momentum in the wholesale channel, revenue declined 1% as marketplace inventory levels remain lean, and Vietnam factory closures and longer transit times disrupt the flow of inventory supply to meet marketplace demand.
In EMEA, Q2 revenue grew 6% on a currency neutral basis and EBIT grew 22% on a reported basis.
Wholesale revenue grew 6% on a currency neutral basis as we comp prior year market closures.
Nike Direct also grew 6% led by double digit growth in Nike-owned stores as we comp prior year store closures, with traffic improvement due to tourism picking up and back to school holidays.
Nike Digital was down 1% as we compare to extraordinary levels of off price sales in the prior year, as the geography leveraged digital in the prior year to liquidate excess inventory.
This quarter, our full price Digital business grew over 20%, resulting in a 30 point improvement in full prices sales mix, double-digit growth in AUR and improvement in markdown rates and promotions.
In Greater China, Q2 revenue declined 24% on a currency neutral basis and EBIT declined 36% on a reported basis, however, season-to-date holiday retail sales across the total market have trended more favorably.
We saw disproportionate impacts to our wholesale revenue, which declined 27% on a currency neutral basis.
Nike Direct declined 21%, with declines in both digital and physical retail channels.
Digital declined 27%, partially impacted by delay in product launch timing on Sneakers.
Over the 11.11 consumer moment, we drove stronger digital performance with significant member acquisition and higher AOV through better engagement with consumers.
To support this activity and normalize our marketing investment levels, we increased our investment in demand creation in the second quarter by more than 40% versus the prior year.
Q2 revenue declined 6% on a currency neutral basis and EBIT declined 8% on a reported basis.
Nike Direct grew 6%, led by Nike Digital growth of 25%.
The Dia De Los Muertos footwear pack saw 100% sell through and this story was extended to the world through our new partnership with Roblox.
Specifically for fiscal '22, we continue to expect Revenue to grow mid single-digits versus the prior year, in line with guidance from 90 days ago.
We are raising our gross margin guidance to expand 150 basis points versus the prior year.
We are also planning for supply chain cost for the full year to increase relative to our estimates 90 days ago, with a greater impact in the second half.
Last, we now expect foreign exchange to be a 55 basis points tailwind versus prior year.
