First quarter was marked by a meaningful sell-off in interest rates as the 10-year note rose over 80 basis points, signifying one of the largest quarterly sell-offs in the past 5 years.
While FOMC members had forecasted a strong 0.2% growth this year at the December meeting, they revised their projections up to 6.5% by the March meeting.
annual growth would be the strongest in nearly 40 years as the significant progress made on vaccinations appears to be paving the path out of the pandemic.
Inflation is likely to temporarily rise above the Fed's 2% target in the near term, but it remains uncertain as to whether persist and higher inflation will take hold until we see meaningfully higher wages for consumers.
Our capital allocation to credit rose from 22% to 27% this past quarter primarily driven by $1.4 billion of gross residential credit investments.
We announced the sale of our commercial real estate business to Slate Asset Management for a purchase price of $2.33 billion.
Moreover, we were still in the somewhat early stages of the economic cycle and could therefore pick up 200, 300 basis points of excess spread and senior transitional light loans with strong visibility of business plan in top markets.
Given the customary closing conditions and regulatory approvals, we're still multiple months away from receiving the capital back from the sale, which will be approximately $650 million.
However, as we have said in the past, in the absence of a severe pricing dislocation, we do not see capital allocated to the sector much above 10% on a run-rate basis given the implied structural leverage and liquidity of the asset.
Now additionally, we continue to add to our third-party and in-house sourcing capabilities on the residential credit front, which drove the over $450 million of whole loan purchases we saw in the quarter, and our pipeline continues to grow.
And we'll also retain a $500 million commercial mortgage-backed securities portfolio, which we expect to grow over time depending on pricing and our outlook.
While the sell-off brought mortgage rates above 3%, we remain in high prepayment environment due to technological latencies and increased capacity in the originator community.
consumers have been able to successfully navigate the COVID pandemic with household net worth at all-time highs personal savings rates in excess of 10%, household debt to income at historical lows, and year-over-year declines in credit card and auto delinquencies.
The health and resurgence of the consumer has also benefited the residential credit market with outstanding forbearance plans declining to 4.4% of the total market as of mid-April, down from 5.2% as of year end and first-lien delinquencies down over a hundred basis points on the quarter coming in at five spot zero two percent.
National home prices were up 12% on a year-over-year basis in most recent release, and will most likely continue to see outsized depreciation as the supply/demand imbalance is a long-term structural issue that will not be resolved at the current pace of housing completions.
Regarding our rental credit portfolio, consistent with our comments on our last earnings call surrounding attractive residential credit spreads and net interest margin, we were active in deploying capital by purchasing approximately $910 million of residential credit securities and settling $467 million of predominantly expanded credit residential whole loans.
The residential credit portfolio ended the quarter at $3.4 billion of economic risk, excluding our committed loan pipeline.
Leverage across the residential credit portfolio has remained conservative with financial recourse leverage at one spot zero debt equity, with resi ending the quarter comprising $1.8 billion of the firm's capital.
Within securities, greater than 95% of our purchases were concentrated in the unrated MPL, RPL, and seasoned CRT subsectors.
We continue to be proactive in sourcing accretive assets and had a robust pipeline of $410 million that we anticipate will settle over the next few months.
In March, we securitized $257 million of expanded credit hold loans in a non-QM transaction, generating $15 million of term-funded subordinate securities with an expected low mid-double-digit ROE with minimal recourse leverage.
We also priced our inaugural prime jumbo securitization earlier this week, a $354 million transaction where we retained all of the subordinate securities, approximately $14 million in market value.
Q1 of the middle market lending group was influenced by a combination of our portfolio success through the pandemic as exhibited by the year-end watch list decreasing by 41% versus the prior year, followed by a very intense refi driven market in the absence of any meaningful new issue M&A throughout Q1.
This resulted in the portfolio modestly declining from $2.39 billion at year end to $2.07 billion at quarter end $331 million.
As in 2020, we are very pleased with underlying portfolio performance with continuation of zero nonaccrual credits versus the Water Direct Lending index average of 2.9% and and a watch list presenting less than 4% of the Annaly middle market total portfolio size.
In addition, the portfolio continues to migrate toward a first lien -- moving three full percentage points from 66% at year end to 69% at 331.
As we have reiterated over the past 10 years, Annaly middle-market significant outputs during periods of intense turbulence is a function of staying true to the industries in which we want to invest, the forecastability of underlying credits to survive tumult, and partnering with private equity owners that exhibit like-mindedness and track records consistent with our own inside the very industries in which we want to be active.
We continue to generate strong core results from the portfolio for the first quarter of 2021, benefiting from the continued low interest rates in the funding market and sustained specialness in dollar to set the stage with some summary information, our book value per share was $8.95 for Q1, a slight increase from Q4 2020.
Book value increased on GAAP net income of $1.75 billion or $1.25 per share, partially offset by the common and preferred dividends of $335 million or $0.24 per share and lower other comprehensive income of $1.7 billion or $0.98 per share.
A significant impact to GAAP net income and therefore, book value for the quarter was the held-for-sale accounting entries recorded in association with the announcement of the sale of our commercial real estate platform, particularly the impairment of goodwill of $71.8 million or $0.05 per share.
We generated core earnings per share, excluding PAA, of $0.29, a decrease of 3% or $0.01 per share from the prior quarter.
Combining our book value performance with the $0.22 common dividend we declared during Q1, our quarterly economic return was 2.8%.
As I noted earlier, our book value increase reflected a $0.05 impairment of goodwill.
Excluding this impairment, our tangible economic return for the quarter was 3.6%.
Economic return and tangible economic return for Q4 were 5.1% and 5.2%, respectively.
Taking a closer look at the GAAP we generated GAAP net income of $1.8 billion or $1.23 per common share, up from $879 million or $0.60 per common share in the quarter.
Specifically, GAAP net income benefited from rising interest rates reflected in unrealized gains on interest rate swaps of $772 million, which was $258 million in the prior quarter; other derivatives led by futures of $517 million, which was $12 million of unrealized losses in the prior quarter, and swaptions of $306 million, which was $4 million of unrealized losses in the prior quarter.
GAAP net income also benefited from lower interest expense on lower average repo rates and slightly lower average repo balances at roughly $65 billion.
This evaluation resulted in recognition of valuation allowances and impairments of approximately $157.4 million on loans, real estate, and securities offset by annualized gains on CMBS available for sale of $16.8 million.
And in Q1, we reversed the previously recorded reserves of $135 million through earnings.
In aggregate, the divestitures of our commercial real estate platform through the sale to Slate Asset Management and our opportunistic sale of a portion of our skilled nursing facilities in the fourth quarter of 2020 will result in a $0.02 portfolio benefit to tangible book value at closing, which will be fully recognized over time due to GAAP accounting.
In conjunction with the acquisition of CreXus in 2013, we recognized an intangible asset of Given our intention to exit the commercial real estate business, we have impaired the carrying value of the goodwill, again, $71.8 million or $0.05 per share in Q1.
We recorded a decrease in reserves of $6.2 million on funded commitments during Q1, driven by a reduction in the portfolio and improved macroeconomic assumptions.
Total reserves net of charge-offs comprised 1.58% of our MML loan portfolio as of March 31, 2021.
First, consistent with my commentary around GAAP drivers, interest expense of $76 million was lower than $94 million in the prior quarter due to lower average repo rates and balances.
We had increased expenses related to the net interest component of interest rate swaps of $80 million relative to $67 million in the prior quarter as the swap portfolio position increased by $5.5 billion.
And while the amount is consistent with Q4 at $97 million, dollar roll income contributed meaningfully to core for the quarter, given continued record levels.
Today, we see overnight rates in the low single digits and term market north of six months at 12 to 14 basis points in the bilateral market.
As a result, we successfully executed our strategy to add duration to our repo book, with our weighted average days to maturity up compared to prior quarter at 88 days versus 64.
Providing further color regarding our reduced interest expense for the quarter, while overall cost of funds is consistent with the prior quarter at 87 basis points, the composition differs from Q4, with repo interest expense lower, the cost of funds associated with hedges increasing due to the increase in added.
Our average REPO rate for the quarter was 26 basis points compared to 35 basis points in the prior quarter.
And we ended March with a repo rate of 20 basis points, down from 32 basis points at the end of December 2020.
And considering our liquidity profile, we selected to fund the most liquid credit assets and utilize capital to The portfolio generated 191 bps of NIM, down from 198 bps as of Q4, driven primarily by the decrease in asset yields.
Previously, we've provided a range of OPEX targets associated with potential cost savings from our internalization of 1.6% to 1.75%.
And in the prior year, we incurred G&A costs for an annual OPEX ratio in this range of 1.62%.
We expect to realize cost savings due to the disposition of our commercial real estate business, and began to see these in Q1 with an OPEX to equity ratio of 1.4%.
Giving consideration to the pivot in our strategy in commercial real estate to resi credit MSR and our MML business, we believe that a revised estimated range For OPEX to equity for 2021 would be 1.45% to 1.6%.
And to wrap things up, Annaly ended the quarter with an excellent liquidity profile with $8.9 billion of unencumbered assets, slightly up from prior quarters of $8.7 billion, including cash and unencumbered Agency MBS of $6.2 billion.
