On a U.S. GAAP basis, for the third quarter of 2021, NOV reported revenues of $1.34 billion and a net loss of $69 million.
For the third quarter ended September 30, 2021, NOV once again posted strong orders with consolidated book-to-bill of over 150%, reflective of steadily strengthening commodity prices and oilfield activity.
However, NOV's reported consolidated revenue declined 5% sequentially, and EBITDA fell to $56 million during the third quarter.
I'll start by reminding everyone that our second quarter financials included credits related to a project cancellation settlement within Rig Technologies, which contributed $74 million in revenue and $57 million in EBITDA.
We excluded those credits from our discussion on our last call and excluding these credits again from the sequential comparison today, points to consolidated third quarter revenues that were essentially flat, down only $2 million sequentially and EBITDA that was up with EBITDA margins on this basis, rising from 3.5% to 4.2%.
We recognized a $12 million charge stemming from a combination of COVID disruptions and execution challenges on a large offshore project within our Completion & Production Solutions segment, which I'll describe more fully in a moment.
In fact, given: one, stronger oil and natural gas prices lately; two, the emergence of many of our key offshore drilling customers from bankruptcy; three, the significant reduction in costs that NOV has achieved through the past two years; four, our third quarter in a row of sequential double-digit top line growth and solid flow-throughs for our Wellbore Technology segment; and five, book-to-bill is in excess of 100% for the second quarter in a row for both the Completion & Production Solutions and Rig Technologies segments.
Lead times for forgings have extended out from six weeks to 18 weeks.
And while prices for plate steel and coiled steel are now up more than 240% year-over-year, at least we appear to be seeing some stability in steel pricing as iron ore prices have declined.
Spot container shipping rates from Asia to the U.S. are now five times what they were this time last year, 14 times what they were in 2019.
Additionally, ocean freight reliability is down to 38% and about half of where it was historically, which has led to more use of expensive airfreight.
Completion & Production Solutions identified another $50 million of annual cost reductions, including shuttering another half dozen facilities over the next few quarters.
Despite the level of contracted offshore rigs declining sequentially and I'll add a low level of actual offshore equipment orders for us, outside of the 20,000-psi pressure control equipment order for Transocean, we are being quietly asked to quote on several stacked rigs that are looking at coming back to the market.
We see them raising their prices materially over, say, the next 18 months as prosperity trickles down to this level in the food chain.
Our offshore wind installation vessel business won two packages from Cadeler and remains on track to achieve revenue run rate of $400 million a year by Q4 of next year.
NOV's consolidated revenue in the third quarter of 2021 was $1.34 billion, a 5% decrease compared to the second quarter.
Adjusted EBITDA was $56 million or 4.2% of sales.
During the third quarter, we generated $105 million from cash flow from operations and $66 million of free cash flow.
We ended Q3 with net debt of $36 million, comprised of long-term debt of $1.70 billion and cash and cash equivalents of $1.67 billion.
Our Wellbore Technologies segment generated $507 million in revenue during the third quarter, an increase of $44 million or 10% sequentially.
Revenue improved 6% in North America and 13% in international markets as the momentum of the global recovery continued to build in all major geographical regions.
EBITDA improved $14 million to $77 million or 15.2% of sales as inflationary pressures and a less favorable mix limited incremental margins to 32%.
Our downhole tools business realized a 5% improvement in revenue during the third quarter.
Our Agitator system was recently used to help a customer establish a new rate of penetration benchmark in Colombia, delivering a field record rate of penetration of 201 feet per hour.
Our SelectShift Downhole Adjustable Motor was used by a large operator in the Northeast U.S. during a 12-well drilling campaign and drove a 30% reduction in average drill times due to the tool's ability to change bend settings downhole saving trips out of the hole.
While the business unit saw improvements in all regions, the North Sea and Latin America were particularly strong and offshore job counts improved by 17% sequentially, despite the impact of hurricanes in the Gulf of Mexico during the quarter.
U.S. operators are showing an increasing preference for 5.5-inch drill pipe, which unlike smaller diameter pipe sizes is in limited supply.
For our Wellbore Technologies segment, improving global activity levels, partially offset by lingering supply chain challenges, should allow for sequential revenue growth between 3% to 6% in the fourth quarter.
We expect improving absorption in our manufacturing facilities and better pricing to be partially offset by supply chain challenges and continued inflationary pressures, limiting incremental margins to around 20% in the fourth quarter.
Our Completion & Production Solutions segment generated $478 million in revenue during the third quarter, a decrease of $19 million or 4% sequentially.
EBITDA for the quarter was a loss of $5 million or 1% of sales.
Orders during the third quarter were $384 million, yielding a book-to-bill of 144% with all but one business realizing a book-to-bill greater than 1.
Backlog for the segment ended at approximately $100 million higher sequentially to end the quarter at $1.1 billion.
Indicative of the improving outlook for offshore activity, orders improved sequentially, achieving their highest levels since 2019, resulting in a book-to-bill that exceeded 140% for the second straight quarter.
For the fourth quarter of 2021, we anticipate our Completion & Production Solutions segment will continue to face COVID and supply chain challenges, but improved backlogs and growing aftermarket activity should allow for segment revenues to improve 10% to 15% with incremental margins in the mid-30% range.
Our Rig Technologies segment generated revenues of $390 million in the third quarter, a decrease of $97 million or 20% sequentially.
Excluding the $74 million in revenue recognized in the second quarter from the settlement of the offshore rig project cancellation, revenues declined $23 million sequentially, primarily due to the timing of certain projects nearing completion during the third quarter.
Adjusting for the impact of the offshore rig project cancellation, EBITDA increased $7 million on an improved sales mix and cost savings.
Orders for the segment increased to $300 million, yielding a book-to-bill of 190%.
As Clay mentioned, we remain on track to achieve an annualized revenue run rate of $200 million by the end of this year and a run rate of approximately $400 million by the end of 2022.
Rig capital equipment orders improved for the second straight quarter, highlighted by an award for our third 20,000-psi BOP project.
One of our customers recently indicated that it expects to have the entirety of its fleet under contract by the end of 2021, a remarkable feat considering where the industry was just 12 months ago.
We also saw a 30% sequential increase in the number of quotations by our field engineering group, predominantly driven by the customers I described earlier, who would like help from our engineers in determining the requirements to reactivate their stacked rigs.
For the fourth quarter, we expect revenues for this segment to grow 8% to 12% with incremental margins in the mid-teens.
