For the second quarter, our net sales were a record and nearly $4.4 billion and our adjusted earnings per diluted share from continuing operations were $1.94.
Our adjusted earnings per share was similar to the second quarter of 2019, despite sales volumes being 6% lower than that period and we are dealing with historical high levels of raw material inflation in the current period [Phonetic].
Coming in the quarter, we expected these disruptions would have an estimated impact of $70 million to $90 million.
However, the actual impact was much more severe and closer to $200 million.
Our automotive OEM business was impacted most significantly from supply disruptions as we estimate that more than 2 million less cars were built than initially expected during the quarter.
This impacted our sales by about $100 million or higher than $40 million more than we expected in April.
Finally, as we expected the supply disruptions led to shortages of certain raw materials with anticipated impact of $30 million to $50 million, but the actual impact was closer to $100 million.
We're also continuing our strong cost management evidenced by our SG&A as a percentage of sales being 130 basis points lower than the second quarter of 2019.
This is being supported by our ongoing execution on our structural cost savings programs, realized an incremental $40 million of savings in the second quarter.
We have increased our targeted full-year 2021 savings by about 10% to $135 million.
We had yet another strong operating cash performance during the quarter and ended the quarter with about $1.3 billion of cash and cash equivalents, given us continued flexibility to do additional accretive cash deployment in the upcoming quarters.
Our current best estimate is our sales are expected to be unfavorably impacted by about $150 million in the third quarter, due to these issues.
We also expect raw material costs to remain at elevated levels in the third quarter, our current best estimate is that they will be inflated by [Indecipherable] 20%, compared to the third quarter of 2020 with businesses and our industrial coatings segment experiencing the largest increases, due to the raw material mix of those types of coatings.
In the third quarter these acquisitions will add about $500 million of incremental sales to our company.
Including our acquisitions, we expect overall sales growth to be over 20%, compared to the third quarter of 2020.
In addition, full-year 2021 adjusted earnings, excluding amortization expense and other non-recurring items is expected to be $7.40 to $7.60, which at the midpoint would be about 13% higher than the adjusted earnings per share we realized in 2019, despite the significant raw material inflationary pressures we are dealing with this year.
Finally, I'm very pleased that our Board recently approved a dividend increase of about 10%.
Our September payment coupled with the anticipated payment of a similar quarterly dividend in December, will mark 50 consecutive years of annual per share increases in the Company's dividend.
In closing, I could not be more proud of our now 50,000 employees around the world, who is [Phonetic] share of our customers, our communities and our many stakeholders.
