Last night we reported a loss of $1.11 in adjusted operating earnings per share which included pre-tax $500 million in COVID 19 impacts, or $5.59 per share.
Our 12 month trailing ROE was 2.1%, which included 9.8% in COVID 19 impacts.
Premium growth was strong at 9.5% and we ended the quarter with excess capital of $1 billion.
In the US individual mortality business, COVID 19 claims were $235 million in the quarter, slightly above the high end of our rules of thumb range.
COVID 19 claims in India and South Africa were $161 million and $64 million respectively as those countries also experienced a material delta wave, and Jonathan will provide further insights on our claims shortly.
The highlights this quarter include strong earnings across all lines and regions from our GFS business, deployment of $140 million of capital into in-force transactions, including our largest to date longevity transaction in the Netherlands.
This brings the year-to-date capital deployment into in-force transactions to a total of $440 million putting us on track for a very strong year as our pipelines remain very good with opportunities in all regions.
That business has grown from a relatively small base a few years ago, the one that has produced $66 million of adjusted operating income through the first nine months of this year.
RGA reported a pre-tax adjusted operating loss of $89 million for the quarter and adjusted operating earnings per share loss of $1.11 per share which includes a negative COVID 19 impact of $5.59 per share.
Our trailing 12 months adjusted ROE was 2.1% which is net of COVID impacts of 9.8%.
While we did experience a significant level of COVID 19 impacts, our underlying non-COVID 19 results were strong as demonstrated by the year-to-date growth in our book value per share excluding AOCI of 4% to $137.60.
I would highlight this growth in book value per share is after absorbing approximately $1 billion pre-tax of COVID 19 claim costs.
Consolidated reported premiums increased 9.5% in the quarter, or 7.7% on a constant currency basis.
The effective tax rate for the quarter was 15.2% on pre-tax adjusted operating loss below our expected range of 23% to 24% primarily due to adjusted operating income and higher tax jurisdictions and losses in tax jurisdictions, for which we did not receive a tax benefit.
We saw non COVID 19 excess claims of approximately $75 million, which is consistent with higher non-COVID 19 population mortality as per CDC reporting.
The US Group and individual Health business both performed better than our expectations due to favorable experience overall, even after reflecting $15 million of COVID 19 claims in our US Group lines of business.
The Canada Traditional segment results reflected favorable experience in the group and creditor lines of business, slightly offset by COVID 19 claim costs in individual life -- line of approximately $5 million.
In the Europe, Middle East and Africa segment, the Traditional business results reflected COVID 19 claim cost of $80 million in total, of which $64 million was in South Africa, and $13 million in the U.K.
EMEA's Financial Solutions had a good quarter as business results reflected favorable longevity experience, $4 million attributable to COVID 19.
Turning to our Asia Pacific Traditional business, Asia results reflect COVID 19 claim cost of $169 million of which $161 million was in India.
The Corporate and Other segment reported pre-tax adjusted operating loss of $27 million, which is in line with our quarterly average run rate.
Moving on to investments, the non-spread portfolio yield for the quarter was 4.95%, reflecting both our well-diversified portfolio allocation and strong variable investment income primarily due to realizations from limited partnerships and real estate joint ventures.
Our new money rate increased to 3.7% with the majority of purchases in public investment grade assets and contributions from strong private asset production.
Regarding capital management, our excess capital position at the end of the quarter was approximately $1 billion.
We deployed $140 million into in-force transactions and repurchased $46 million of shares.
Additionally, we entered into an asset intensive retrocession transaction that generated $94 million of capital and enhanced our returns.
COVID 19 deaths under the age of 65, ages where there is more life insurance exposure were at their highest points over the past six quarters.
COVID 19 claim costs were $235 million in the quarter, slightly above the higher end of our rule of thumb.
Q3 results reflect higher mortality in ages under 65 and larger average claim sizes.
Turning to markets other than US individual mortality COVID 19 claim costs of $161 million in India were higher than our prior estimates, reflecting the more adverse impact of the Q2 delta wave.
$30 million of this impact in the quarter relates to an increase in IBNR, resulting in a COVID specific IBNR balance for India of $75 million at the end of the quarter.
COVID 19 claim costs in South Africa are estimated at $64 million in the quarter, reflecting a change in the distribution of general population deaths by province, as well as some large claims volatility.
Other markets including Canada and the U.K. accounted for $30 million of estimated COVID 19 claim costs.
We are maintaining our claim cost rule of thumb of $10 million to $20 million for every 10,000 general population deaths.
