Last night we reported adjusted operating earnings per share of $1.19, which we consider another solid quarter in the context of the pandemic.
In this quarter, we were able to absorb estimated total COVID-19 related claim costs of $300 million globally and delivered profitable earnings due to the underlying strength in many of our businesses.
We completed a number of transactions in the quarter and deployed approximately $100 million of capital.
Our investment portfolio held up well, and we ended the year with a strong balance sheet, an excess capital of $1.3 billion.
As I step back and consider our full year results, we reported adjusted operating earnings per share of $7.54.
This includes absorbing estimated total COVID-19 related claim costs of $720 million globally.
And when adjusted for COVID-19 related offsets, including longevity and reduced expenses, we estimate the full year impact of COVID-19 to be roughly $6.80 on adjusted operating EPS.
For the quarter, we reported premium growth of approximately 9%, somewhat higher than recent quarters as we saw good business growth in some areas in addition to some client catch-ups have benefited the reported premiums.
The effective tax rate on pre-tax adjusted operating income was 18.3% for the quarter.
Below the expected range of 23% to 24%, as a result of utilizing foreign tax credits and tax benefits associated with differences in bases and foreign jurisdictions.
The US and Latin America Traditional segment reported pre-tax adjusted operating loss of $89 million in the quarter.
Approximately $230 million of claims are attributed to COVID-19, including $100 million of IBNR claims.
I would also note that our 1999 to 2004 business, excluding COVID-19 continues to perform in line with our mortality expectations as we set back in 2015.
Australia experienced a loss of approximately $26 million.
The Corporate and Other segment reported a pre-tax adjusted operating loss of $24 million, relatively in line with the average run rate.
The nonspread portfolio yield for the quarter was 4.2%, a significant improvement relative to that in the third quarter, primarily due to above average run rate for variable investment income as we experienced a high level of commercial mortgage prepayments and some realizations in our various private partnerships.
RGA's leverage ratios remained stable at the end of the year, following the second quarter senior debt issuance and our liquidity remains strong with cash and cash equivalents of $3.4 billion.
