We are pleased to report this quarter that we continue to make meaningful progress in our ongoing strategic transformation to capital light high growth franchise company in August 2019 we estimated that it would take us 18 to 24 months to complete our conversion to a fully franchise portfolio.
In the first half of fiscal 2020, we have converted 988 salons to franchise owners, with line of sight to the sale of approximately 900 additional salons.
This means that net of closing roughly 350 to 500 underperforming salons, which typically occurs at lease expiration.
We have approximately 50% of the remaining company-owned salon portfolio in the pipeline at various stages of transition.
As of December 31, nearly 70% of our portfolio is now franchised.
And you may recall that when I began my tenure as CEO in April of 2017, our salon portfolio was roughly 28% franchised and 72% company-owned.
In January, we announced actions that will reduce G&A by approximately $19 million on an annualized basis.
Further, we believe it is the right time to redesign our capital structure so that our debt facility is better suited for a company that is now 70% franchised.
We may also utilize our cash in the next 18 months to complete any remaining elements of our multiyear restructuring, including closing nonperforming company-owned salons, when it's justified by the economics, although our operational bias is typically to manage these salons to lease expiration; paying down some debt, we determined that it's wise to do so; supporting our ongoing G&A reductions through severance programs and if needed, capital investments in salon refurbishments and remodels as we consolidated our various brands into what we have called the Fab 5.
Yesterday, we reported on a consolidated basis, second quarter revenues of $208.8 million, which represented a decrease of $65.9 million or 24% versus the prior year.
The year-over-year revenue decline was driven primarily by the conversion of a net 1,447 company-owned salons to the company's franchise portfolio over the past 12 months and the closure of 172 salons, of which the majority were cash-flow negative and not essential to our future plans.
The headwinds in the quarter were partially offset by a $5.8 million increase in franchise revenues and $33.6 million of rent revenue recorded in connection with the new lease accounting guidance adopted in the first quarter of fiscal 2020.
Second quarter consolidated adjusted EBITDA of $17 million was $3.6 million or 17.5% unfavorable to the same period last year, and was driven primarily by the elimination of the EBITDA that had been generated in the prior period from the net 1447 company on salon that have been sold and converted to the franchise portfolio over the past 12 months.
The decline in adjusted EBITDA was partially offset by a $5.6 million increase in the gain associated with the sale of company-owned salons.
Excluding discrete items and the income from discontinued operations the company reported decreased second quarter 2020 adjusted net income of $4.6 million or $0.13 earnings per diluted share as compared to adjusted net income of $8 million or $0.18 earnings per diluted share for the same period last year.
The year-over-year decrease in adjusted net income was driven primarily by the elimination of adjusted net income that had been generated in the prior year from salons that were sold and converted to the company's asset-light franchise portfolio over the past 12 months.
On a year-to-date basis, consolidated adjusted EBITDA of $46.8 million was $1.1 million or 2.3% favorable versus the same period last year.
The year-over-year favorability was driven primarily by a $24.7 million increase in the gain, excluding noncash goodwill derecognition related to the year-to-date sale and conversion of 988 company-owned salons to the franchise portfolio.
Excluding the impact of the gains second quarter year-to-date adjusted EBITDA totaled $5.6 million, which was $23.7 million unfavorable year-over-year and like the second quarter results, this unfavorable variance is also driven largely by the elimination of EBITDA related to the sold and transferred salons over the past 12 months.
Looking at the segment-specific performance and starting with our franchise segment second quarter franchise royalties and fees of $29.3 million increased $6.7 million or 29.8% versus the same quarter last year, driven primarily by increased franchise salon counts.
Product sales to franchisees decreased to $1 million year-over-year, to $16.9 million, driven primarily by a $6.5 million decrease in products sold to TBG, partially offset by increased franchise salon counts.
As a reminder, franchise same-store sales are calculated in a manner that is consistent with how we calculate our same-store sales in our company-owned salon portfolio and represents the total change in sales for salons that have been a franchise location for more than 12 months.
As we are in this transition phase, salons are leading company-owned comps but not entering franchise comps for 12 months, which adds temporary noise to same-store sales comparisons.
Second quarter franchise adjusted EBITDA of $13.1 million grew approximately $4.6 million year-over-year, driven by growth in the franchise salon portfolio and better leverage of our cost structure, partially offset by lower margins on franchise product sales.
After adjusting for the noncontributory revenue associated with ad fund revenue, franchisee rent revenue and TBG product sales EBITDA margin was approximately 37.5%, which is approximately 4.2% favorable year-over-year and is in line with where we would expect it to be.
Year-to-date, franchise adjusted EBITDA of $24.9 million grew approximately $6.6 million or 36% year-over-year.
Now looking at the company-owned salon segment, second quarter revenue decreased $105.3 million or 45% versus the prior year to $128.9 million.
This year-over-year decline is driven and consistent with the decrease of approximately 1,598 company-owned salons over the past 12 months, which can be bucketed into two main categories.
First, the conversion of 1,498 company-owned salons to our asset-light franchise platform over the course of the past 12 months.
These net company-owned salon reductions were partially offset by 51 salons that were brought -- bought back from franchisees over the last year and 21 new company-owned organic salon openings during the last 12 months, which we expect to transition to our portfolio in the month's end.
Second quarter company-owned salon segment adjusted EBITDA decreased $17 million year-over-year to $4.2 million.
Consistent with the total company consolidated results, the year-over-year variance was driven primarily by the elimination of the adjusted EBITDA that had been generated in the prior year period from the company-owned salons that were sold and converted into the franchise platform over the past 12 months.
On a year-to-date basis, company-owned salon consolidated adjusted EBITDA of $15.7 million was $33.2 million unfavorable versus the same period last year.
The unfavorable year-over-year variance is driven by the elimination of the adjusted EBITDA related to the sold and transferred salons over the past 12 months, partially offset by management initiatives to rightsize the source structure in the field.
Second quarter adjusted EBITDA of $0.3 million increased $8.8 million and is driven primarily by the $15 million of net gains excluding noncash goodwill derecognition from the sale and conversion of company owned salons, the net impact of management initiatives to eliminate noncore, nonessential G&A expense and lower year-over-year incentive and equity compensation.
By eliminating approximately 290 positions, including 15 contractors across the U.S. and Canada, which is expected to result in approximately $19 million of annualized G&A savings as the company accelerates into its multiyear transformation.
Lastly, I wanted to point out that vendition cash proceeds during the second quarter were approximately $71,000 per salon compared to approximately $69,000 per salon in the first quarter of our fiscal 2020, which is consistent quarter-over-quarter.
At the end of the quarter, we made a decision to pay $30 million toward our outstanding debt, which decreased our cash balance to $49.8 million as of December 31, 2019.
When looking at the cash flow statement, the single largest use of cash is approximately $17 million use of working capital.
In addition to change in working capital, when reconciling the adjusted EBITDA to operating capital, you will need to take into account the fact that the $41.2 million net gain from the conversion of our company-owned salons to the franchise platform are included in our net income and adjusted EBITDA but not included in cash from operations as the proceeds are reported as inflows in the investing section of the cash flow statement.
At the end of December, TBG transferred back to Regis 207 of its North American mall-based salons, a roughly 10% of the company's portfolio.
The remaining lease liability associated with the TBG salons is approximately $30 million and Regis will operate the salons until lease end date or until a new franchise owner is identified.
As a reminder, when we executed the original transaction with TBG back in October of 2017, the lease liability for the mall-based portfolio was approximately $140 million, and as noted, is less than $30 million today.
