Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
The announced dividend of $0.15 per share represents a dividend yield of around 8% based on closing price yesterday, and this is our 67th consecutive quarter with dividends.
In light of the continued uncertainty surrounding Seadrill and outcome of their pending financial restructuring, the Board decided to adjust the dividend down to $0.15 and thereby effectively exclude all contribution from offshore rigs for the time being.
We believe that the market has already discounted this in the SFL share price as we, prior to this dividend adjustment, were trading at more than 13% yield based on the prior dividend, which is a very high number in the current low interest rate environment.
Over the years, we have paid more than $27 per share in dividends or $2.3 billion in total, and we have a significant and fixed rate charter backlog, supporting continued dividend capacity in the future.
The total charter revenues of $157 million in the quarter was in line with the previous quarter, with more than 90% of this from vessels on long-term charters and less than 10% from vessels employed on short-term charters and in the spot market.
The EBITDA equivalent cash flow in the quarter was approximately $117 million.
And last 12 months, the EBITDA equivalent has been approximately $481 million, similar to the situation the last 12 months in the prior quarter.
Excluding cash in the rig owning subsidiaries, the consolidated cash position at quarter end was more than $200 million, up from around $150 million at the end of the second quarter.
In addition, we had $33 million in marketable securities at quarter end.
And after quarter end, we have used some of the cash to take out the financing of the drilling rig West Taurus, but we still have a strong cash position with more than $100 million remaining.
Our fixed rate backlog stands at approximately $3.2 billion after recent charter extensions and vessel sales, providing significant cash flow visibility going forward.
Of this, $2.4 billion relates to shipping assets alone and excludes revenues from 16 vessels trading in the short-term market and also excludes future profit share optionality.
The profit share contribution, which I mentioned, adds optionality value was around $6 million in the third quarter.
We are very happy to see that it happened much quicker than anyone anticipated and both vessels are now trading out chartered out again on one on 100-day charter and one for 11 months.
We have repurchased all the debt on the idle rig West Taurus at the discount essentially limited to the $83 million corporate guarantee, the cash in the rig owning subsidiary, which was already pledged to the banks anyway for some margin.
The delivery took place yesterday and net cash to us is more than $10 million after repayment of the associated financing, and the proceeds are expected to be reinvested in new accretive transactions.
Excluding the drilling rigs, which I will cover on the next page, the backlog from shipping assets was $2.4 billion at the end of the quarter.
Over the years, we have changed both fleet composition and structure, and we now have 81 shipping assets in our portfolio and no vessels remaining from the initial fleet in 2004.
And over time, the mix of the charter backlog has varied from 100% tankers to nearly 60% offshore at one stage to container market being the largest right now.
In addition, we have 16 vessels traded in the short-term market, which we define as up to 12-month charters and also from time to time, as I mentioned earlier, significant contributions from profit shares on assets.
All three rigs were employed on bareboat charters of Seadrill and generated approximately $24 million in charter hire in the third quarter.
Net of interest and amortization, the contribution was approximately $8 million or around $0.07 per share.
At that time, the loan balance on the rigs was much higher and we have reduced leverage by more than 50% in this three-year period as we illustrate on this slide.
At the end of the second quarter, Seadrill reported a cash position of $1 billion, and while Seadrill did pay full charter hire in the third quarter, no charter hire has been received so far in the fourth quarter.
From the start of the transaction with Seadrill all the way back from 2008, all the revenues from the subcharters of these assets, and in this instance, more importantly here now from the two drilling rigs that are working, the West Linus and West Hercules, the revenues from the subcharter have been paid into accounts pledged to SFL's rig owning entities and refinancing banks.
The company generated gross charter hire of approximately $157 million in the third quarter, with more than 90% of the revenue coming from our fixed charter rate backlog, which currently stands at $3.2 billion.
And while the current charter backlog relating to our offshore assets may be impacted by the pending Seadrill restructuring, the backlog from our shipping portfolio stands at a solid $2.4 billion, providing us a strong visibility on our cash flow going forward.
At quarter end, SFL has a liner fleet of 48 container vessels and two car carriers.
The liner fleet generated gross charter hire of approximately $80 million.
Of this amount, approximately 98% was derived from our vessels on long-term charters.
At quarter end, SFL's liner fleet backlog was approximately $1.8 billion, with an average remaining charter term for approximately four and a half years or approximately seven years if weighted by charter revenue.
Approximately 84% of the liner backlog is the world's largest liner operators, Maersk Line and MSC, with a balance of approximately 16% to Evergreen.
Our tanker fleet generated approximately $24 million in gross charter hire during the quarter, including $4.8 million in profit split contribution from our two VLCCs on charters to Frontline.
The net contribution from the company's two Suezmax tankers was approximately $3.3 million in the third quarter, and the vessels are traded in the short-term market for the time being.
After repayment of associated financing, the transaction increased SFL's cash balance by approximately $10.7 million.
In the third quarter, our dry bulk fleet generated approximately $28.4 million in gross charter hire.
Of this amount, approximately 70% was derived from our vessels on long-term charters.
During the quarter, the company had 10 Handysize vessels employed in spot and short-term markets.
The vessels generated approximately $7 million in net charter hire compared to $2.4 million in the previous quarter.
All of our drilling rigs are long-term bareboat charters to fully guaranteed affiliates of Seadrill Limited and generated approximately $24.4 million in charter hire during the quarter.
This summarizes to an adjusted EBITDA of approximately $170 million for the third quarter or $1.08 per share.
So for the third quarter, we report total operating revenues according to U.S. GAAP, approximately $160 million, which is less than approximately $157 million of charter hire actually received for the reasons just mentioned.
In the quarter, the company reported profit split income of $4.8 million from our tanker vessels on charter to Frontline and $800,000 from profit split arrangements related to fuel savings on some of our large container vessels.
In the third quarter, the credit loss provisions increased by approximately $6.2 million, primarily in wholly owned nonconsolidated subsidiaries.
Furthermore, the company recorded nonrecurring and noncash items, including negative mark-to-market effects relating to interest hedging, currency swaps and equity investments of $600,000 and amortization of deferred charges of $2.3 million.
So overall, and according to U.S. GAAP, the company reported a net profit of $16 million or $0.15 per share.
At quarter end, SFL had approximately $206 million of cash and cash equivalents, excluding $22 million of cash held in wholly owned nonconsolidated subsidiaries.
Furthermore, the company had marketable securities of approximately $33 million, based on market prices at the end of the quarter.
This included 1.4 million shares in Frontline, four million shares in ADS Crude Carriers and other investments in marketable securities, in connection with the sale of 3 older VLCCs to ADS Crude Carriers back in 2018 as well to shares in the company as part payment.
When including the dividend received, the value is estimated approximately $12 million illustrating how SFL, from time to time, takes steps to maximize value for our shareholders.
At quarter end SFL had five debt-free vessels with a combined charter value of approximately $40 million based on average broker appraisals.
So based on Q3 2020 figures, the company had a book equity ratio of approximately 26%.
Then to summarize, the Board has declared a cash dividend of $0.15 per share for the quarter.
This represents a dividend yield of approximately 8% based on the closing share price yesterday.
This is the 67th consecutive quarterly dividend, and since inception of the company in 2004, more than $27 per share or $2.3 billion in aggregate have been returned to shareholders through dividends.
Despite a relatively volatile market in 2020, we have added more than $250 million per fixed charter rate backlog over the last 12 months.
And while risk premiums on energy and shipping investments have increased with the recent volatility in financial markets, SFL has, at the same time, with new attractive financing, has expanded its group of lending banks, especially in the Far East to now represent more than 40% of our lending volume.
SFL's business model has been continuously tested throughout its 16 years of existence and has previously been highly successful in navigating periods of volatility.
