Building on the better-than-anticipated results of the first quarter, second quarter materially exceeded our expectations with comparable 17-hotel portfolio revenues of $104 million, and RevPAR of $96.
RevPAR at all of our open hotels, including Montage Healdsburg, was $107, made up of an average daily rate of $235 and an occupancy of 45.6%.
While the comparison to the second quarter of 2020 is of little value, the open hotel RevPAR of $107 in the second quarter was more than double the open hotel RevPAR of nearly $48 achieved in the first quarter of this year.
Furthermore, our occupancy, ADR and RevPAR have each increased meaningfully on a sequential basis every month this year, and our June RevPAR of almost $130 was nearly 5 times that of the $27 comparable RevPAR achieved this past January.
While special corporate demand for the portfolio is still only around 20% of normal levels in the second quarter, several of our hotels, including Hilton San Diego Bayfront, Embassy Suites La Jolla, Hyatt Regency San Francisco and Hyatt Centric Chicago, witnessed a meaningful acceleration in special corporate room nights.
Even more encouraging is the strength of transient pricing with our second quarter transient rate at $253.
Despite several urban markets still lagging compared to pre pandemic levels, our resort hotels, specifically Wailea Beach resort and Oceans Edge, each achieved higher RevPAR than in the same time in 2019, up 4% and 79%, respectively.
The performance of these hotels was driven by occupancy approaching pre-COVID levels with significantly higher room rates compared to '19, running 30% higher at Wailea Beach Resort and up a staggering 91% at Oceans Edge.
Additionally, our recent acquisition, Montage Healdsburg, has performed favorably to our initial estimates, running at an average rate of over $1,000 in the second quarter.
Group business contributed approximately 80,000 room nights in the second quarter, up from 51,000 room nights in the first quarter, and the outlook for the third and fourth quarters indicate significant sequential improvement.
Several of our larger group of hotels, including Hyatt San Francisco, Boston Park Plaza and Renaissance Orlando, had several groups that picked up over 90% of the contracted blocks in the second quarter, which was substantially higher than we forecasted.
But rooms revenue was not alone and growing substantially on a sequential basis, Food and Beverage revenues increased by 2.5 times in the second quarter representing a 22% increase in food and beverage spend per occupied room and other revenues doubled as higher occupancy drove ancillary revenues such as parking.
Catering revenue per group room night also increased by over 2.5 times as corporate group and associations returned.
As a result of these factors, our comparable total revenue per available room, or TREVPAR, increased from nearly $60 in the first quarter to over $138 in the second quarter.
For example, travelers on TripAdvisor recently ranked Oceans Edge as one of the top 10 hotels in Key West, up from 24 at the end of 2019, even with a massive increase in ADR. These factors give us confidence that the rate increase is sustainable, and additional growth is achievable.
Through July 29, our 17 open hotels generated RevPAR of approximately $165, made up of a 62% occupancy and a $266 average daily rate.
Our July RevPAR represents a $35 increase from June and is $138 higher than that experienced this past January.
The citywide calendar in many of our primary markets are very encouraging over the next several quarters and over 30% of our group room nights on the books for the fourth quarter are for citywide events.
As previously mentioned, several recent groups have picked up 90% to 100% of their room blocks, which was well in excess of our forecast.
Our trailing six-week booking trends are now down only 10% to 15% compared to the same time in 2019, which marks a substantial improvement from the 80% to 90% declines we saw in the first of the year and the 40% to 50% declines we saw going into the second quarter.
During the quarter, the hotel ran an occupancy of 61% at an average rate over $1,000 and in July, the hotel ran at over 70% occupancy at a rate of nearly $1,250.
As of the end of the quarter, we had approximately $210 million of total cash and cash equivalents, including $47 million of restricted cash.
Adjusting for the issuance of our Series I preferred stock and the expected redemption of our Series F, our pro forma total cash balance at the end of the quarter would have been approximately $235 million.
In addition to cash on hand, we also maintained full availability on our $500 million revolving credit facility.
As John mentioned, since our last earnings call, we also executed upon two additional balance sheet enhancing transactions through the issuance of both our 6.125% Series H preferred and our 5.7% Series I preferred.
Proceeds from these two transactions, both of which were record-setting low coupons at the time of issuance, are being used to redeem higher cost existing preferred equity and will reduce our comparable preferred dividends by $1.5 million per year.
Second quarter adjusted EBITDAre was $15 million, and second quarter adjusted FFO per diluted share was a loss of $0.01.
