And through our Signet Love Inspire's Foundation, we have donated $1 million to the Red Cross to help provide food, medical attention, and supplies within Ukraine as well as shelter for the millions of refugees fleeing the country.
market share to 9.3%, a 270 basis points gain over prior year.
This was true in well-established categories like bridal, where Signet is the clear U.S. retail leader with a roughly 30% share, and in lab-created diamonds, where we are widening the gap as the market leader in this new and fast-growing category.
In fact, we have permanently reset our margins over the past four years by 200 basis points ahead of where we were before starting our Path to Brilliance journey.
In fact, we repurchased more than $270 million in shares since mid-January, and still have over $400 million in authorization remaining.
We plan to invest up to $250 million in capital during fiscal '23 to drive our strategies, further enhancing our stores, digital platform, and data analytics advantages.
We expect more weddings this year than we've seen in nearly 40 years.
More than 75% of American consumers say they are ready to travel and a majority of those are already planning trips for June and July despite the inflated cost of these trips versus pre-pandemic levels.
This gives us real-time pricing on more than 450,000 cut and polished stones valued at more than $2 billion.
While it's impossible to predict precisely how long it will take the industry to return to its historical average annual growth rate of 2%.
In fiscal '22, we increased our advertising budget by more than $180 million, and we expect to continue investing again this year.
We hold a 50% share of voice in targeted TV even as we've shifted significantly to a more targeted digital marketing plan.
We see this most vividly in North America, where we drove average transaction values up more than 15% and in-store conversion, up nearly 20% versus two years ago.
The launch of bantor.com, for example, has driven site traffic up more than 80% compared to last year.
Outlets grew nearly 55% compared to last year.
In fact, for the year, Jared's average transaction value increased more than 60% compared to the previous year.
James Allen increased its fashion category sales more than 95% this year with an average transaction value that is more than eight times our North America average.
We only have 22 locations today, and there is clear room for expansion.
Accelerating services is the third pillar of our strategy, and our goal is to grow it into a $1 billion business.
In FY '22, we advanced toward this goal, delivering $620 million in revenue, up 65% versus prior year.
In the fourth quarter, after our relaunch, online attachment increased nearly 400 basis points, and the lifted total attachment 300 basis points versus prior year.
That translated into more than 35% revenue growth in extended service agreements this quarter.
40% of customers who make a second purchase within nine months of their initial purchase will make a third purchase in the next six months, building a relationship that only grows stronger over time.
In fiscal '22, for example, the average transaction value of a returning customer was 14% higher than a new customer.
With over $1.5 billion in e-commerce sales, we are now the largest online specialty jewelry retailer in the U.S., and we are widening the gap.
Last year, when the overall retail average NPS in digital declined by 17 points versus prior year to less than 50, Signet's digital NPS improved by eight points to nearly 70.
Now 65% of all our customers visit our digital sites during their journey, much higher than pre-COVID.
And fully 90% of our highest value customers, those who spend more than $500 with us, engage across our shopping channels, taking advantage of our connected commerce capabilities and services.
This year, we acquired 32% more new customers than we did in fiscal '21 as we continue to sharpen our targeting.
And we regained 37% more customers who had not shopped with us in more than two years.
Over the past four years, we've trimmed over 20% of our fleet.
We delivered nearly 500 basis points more in gross margin in fiscal '22 than we delivered four years ago by driving higher sales on lower occupancy costs.
And our fiscal '22 annual campaign came to an end with an increased fundraising donation of over 85% versus prior year, a total of $7.6 million bringing our total to nearly $100 million in support over the past 25 years.
It's one of the factors driving 90% of our team members to say they are proud of what they achieved every day at Signet.
Now for the quarter, we delivered total sales of $2.8 billion, growth of nearly $625 million over last year.
Fourth-quarter non-GAAP operating income of $411 million is up from $293.8 million last year.
This represents a 14.6% operating margin, up 120 basis points to last year.
Reflected in this improvement is 150 basis points of gross margin expansion, led by the continued leverage on fixed costs from our real estate optimization efforts.
This was slightly offset by 30 basis points in SG&A from deliberate investments in our holiday advertising strategy and staffing initiatives, both of which, we believe, led to an acceleration of top-line results.
This is an area of major progress, and net of cash, our working capital is better by the more than 40% to last year from the following improvements: We drove a 56% improvement in inventory turn versus last year, driven by continued progress of inventory life cycle management as well as the positive impact of fulfillment options like ship from store.
To highlight the health of our inventory, clearance and sell-down penetration declined 10 points to last year.
And further, we drove a 30% increase in our days payable outstanding.
We ended the year with $1.4 billion in cash and overall liquidity of more than $2.6 billion to continue supporting our capital priorities as we look to the year ahead.
To that end, we utilized $193 million of cash in fiscal '22 for capital expenditures, fueling our digital and technology advancements as well as differentiating our banners.
Looking forward, we expect capital expenditures up to $250 million for fiscal 2023.
We have achieved an adjusted debt-to-EBITDAR leverage ratio of 1.9 times this year, which is well within our stated goal of below three times leverage.
As a reminder, we entered a $250 million accelerated share repurchase agreement during the fourth quarter, which was completed after the fiscal year end.
Currently, $413 million remain under our authorization, and with our current valuation, we are focused on share repurchases.
Additionally, we've increased our quarterly common dividend of $0.18 per share to $0.20 per share, a first step in becoming a consistent dividend growth retailer.
These changes, expanding operating margins -- expanded operating margin by nearly 200 basis points and gives us the confidence to provide guidance that outpaces our expectation of industry growth and delivers a double-digit operating margin, all despite macro uncertainties.
We've transformed our business model to do more with less through the following changes: First, we gained nearly 500 basis points resulting from our real estate optimization strategy.
We've cut our fleet by over 20% and also shifted mall stores to more profitable off-mall formats.
For example, Kay, our largest banner is now roughly 50% off-mall.
Informed by our data analytics, we plan staffing store by store and hour by hour, contributing 300 basis points of margin expansion.
And thirdly, we've also invested over 500 basis points of margin to better align Signet with our long-term strategy.
With this context, we expect to deliver total revenue in the range of $8.03 billion to $8.25 billion.
We expect operating income in the range of $921 million to $974 million.
For FY '23, we expect earnings per share in the range of $12.28 to $13 per share.
We expect revenue for the first quarter in the range of $1.78 billion to $1.82 billion, with operating income in the range of $177 million to $186 million.
