We delivered total sales of $1.8 billion this quarter.
That's a same-store sales improvement of 97.4% compared to last year.
On that basis, this quarter represents same-store sales growth of 38.1%.
Total revenue was nearly $425 million higher than two years ago despite having roughly 450 fewer stores, a 16% reduction in store count.
As we continue to transform our operating model, we delivered non-GAAP operating margin of 12.5% this quarter, representing an 860 basis point improvement compared to this time two years ago.
Our recent research also shows that 80% of U.S. consumers believe they are the same or better off economically today than they were before the pandemic.
In the week leading up to Mother's Day, we drove brick-and-mortar same-store sales growth of more than 30% to two years ago, with average transaction value up 18%.
Similarly, growth in eCommerce over the same time period was more than 90%, showing that our Connected Commerce experience is resonating, both in store and online.
Our research indicates 15% of committed couples or approximately 2.3 million couples plan to get engaged this calendar year, which is up high single digits to a typical prepandemic year.
Customers are responding as we saw total sales of our bridal category increased over $150 million or 25% this quarter to two years ago.
For example, our data analytics on Kay shows that new customers are 700 basis points more likely to be on a milestone gifting and holiday or holiday purchase journey, aligning with Kay's target of the generous sentimentalist.
Zales' new customers in the first half of the year are 400 basis points more likely to be on a self-purchase journey than two years ago.
Through a series of integrated initiatives, we've driven a 40% improvement to our overall inventory turn since we began our transformation.
New or high-turn inventory penetration at Kay is now 50% higher than it was two years ago.
We see an opportunity to grow services into $1 billion business.
In a recent survey, 36% of retail consumers expressed interest in customizing their products and services and 20% indicated that they're willing to pay a premium.
Over 80% of bridal customers express interest in some level of customization for their engagement and wedding rings.
Stores with foundries delivered roughly 10% higher sales than Jared locations without them this quarter.
With roughly 50 foundry locations today, we will continue investing in its rollout as we plan to have more than 70 Jareds with foundry experience this fiscal year.
In the second quarter, Jared's average transaction value was 86% higher than Kay's, up from roughly 31% differential this time two years ago.
On the value end of the mid-market, we've continued the rollout of our rebranding test, Banter by Piercing Pagoda, that we began in 100 stores at the end of April.
Based on promising results, we expanded to bring the total to 200 stores on August 2.
Online traffic has doubled, and interaction times on the site have increased 25%.
We recognize that the pandemic was a factor in this shift as 78% of consumers have said that the pandemic made them realize that shopping online is better and easier than their previous perception.
Of engaged couples in 2021, roughly 30% said they bought their engagement ring online, which is more than double the amount in calendar 2019.
In Kay, more than 25% of online orders this quarter utilized at least one of these capabilities.
And in Jared, it was over 30% of online orders.
For example, within Ernest Jones, 20% of our in-store business is now the result of appointments that were made online.
Of those appointments, over 70% results in a sale that averages four times what a walk-in customer spends.
Our research indicates that younger unvaccinated customers, those aged 18 to 49 and particularly those with young children, are more concerned about COVID variants than older customers.
In a recent survey, 85% of our team members said they are proud to work at Signet, illustrating the dedication and commitment to performance within our company.
And third, aligned with our capital priorities, we've expanded our authorized repurchases to $225 million to reflect our confidence in our longer-term growth opportunities and the strength of our balance sheet and cash flow.
Our total sales of $1.8 billion reflect growth of more than 100% over last year.
We delivered approximately $780 million this quarter or 40% of sales.
This is a 650 basis point improvement compared to the second quarter two years ago.
Leveraging of fixed cost contributed more than 400 basis points of the improvement.
SG&A was approximately $503 million or 28% of sales.
This rate reflects a 210 basis point improvement to two years ago.
This model has delivered a sales per labor hour improvement of more than 70% to this time two years ago, while also contributing to our decrease in employee turnover compared to the same time period.
Non-GAAP operating profit was $223 million compared to an operating loss of $41.7 million in the prior year.
Second quarter non-GAAP diluted earnings per share was $3.57, including a discrete tax benefit of $0.80 per share.
This compares to prior year non-GAAP diluted loss per share of $1.13 and diluted earnings per share of $0.51 two years ago.
This has resulted in both a 40% improvement to inventory turn and a reduction in overall inventory levels.
And as we announced today, we've expanded our current authorization of share repurchases to $225 million, which we'll evaluate on an opportunistic basis.
We expect third-quarter sales in the range of $1.26 billion to $1.31 billion, with same-store sales in the range of down 3% to up 1% and non-GAAP EBIT of $10 million to $25 million.
For the fiscal year, we now expect total sales within range of $6.8 billion to $6.95 billion with same-store sales in the range of 30% to 33% and non-GAAP EBIT of $618 million to $673 million.
As we continue to optimize our footprint, we remain on track to open up to 100 locations and close at least 100.
We've opened 37 locations so far this year and closed 33, including 10 mall closures that were then reopened in off-mall locations.
Recall over the past 18 months, we've evolved our real estate strategy from strict fleet rationalization to fleet optimization.
Lastly, recall that I mentioned expected capital expenditures in the range of $190 million to $200 million.
This represents a narrowing of our previous range of $175 million to $200 million as we continue fueling Connected Commerce.
Further, as we've identified incremental cost savings within gross margin and other indirect spend, we're raising our expected cost savings for the year from a range of $75 million to $95 million to a range of $85 million to $105 million.
