Consistent with prior calls, we're going to be just 1 question per caller.
Tools generated 13% organic growth in what we believe to be the strongest demand environment in our history, resulting from positive secular trends, robust professional activity and strong global markets.
Industrial grew 1% organically, driven by continued double-digit growth and share gains in our general industrial and attachment tool businesses.
Security delivered another strong quarter with 8% organic growth.
The overall company adjusted operating margin rate was 12.2%, down from the prior year as growth investments and higher supply chain costs that accelerated in the quarter more than offset volume leverage, price mix benefits and margin resiliency.
Adjusted earnings per share for the quarter was $2.77, down 4% year-over-year.
The combination of these two high-quality complementary companies with our existing outdoor business creates a powerful growth engine with approximately $4 billion of revenue across all categories the $4 billion, we expect approximately $3 million of that in -- of the $4 billion to be a direct result of closing the two transactions in the coming weeks.
Excel focuses on zero-turn mowers and offers a range of premier commercial grade and prosumer equipment, with Tier 1 niche pro brands such as Hustler and Big Dog.
MTD has a strong presence in the retail channel with approximately 1,500 dealer locations.
Excel exclusively distributes through its 1,400 outlet dealer channel, which is largely geographically complementary to MTD's dealers.
And finally, on one more outdoor growth front, we have an opportunity in the $4 billion high-margin parts service segment as we build our presence and serve our customers.
It is 1 of our 3 strategic pillars: performance, innovation and social responsibility.
Over the last 12 months, we have added approximately 1,300 new employees with deep domain expertise and technical knowledge in critical areas, including sales, engineering, product management, brand, industrial design, e-commerce and end-user insights.
We have approximately $200 million of new innovation and growth investment projects in process which are included in our second half 2021 run rate.
The POWERSTACK battery is 25% smaller, 15% lighter than our comparable DEWALT 20-volt 2 amp-hour battery and it delivers 5 0% more power with 2x the charge cycles, making this revolutionary design the lightest and most powerful and longest-lasting compact battery from DEWALT. And it is compatible with our DEWALT 20-volt system.
This line of consumer DIY tools features 5 0% post-consumer recycled content in the enclosures, which reduces virgin plastic use and supports closing the loop in a circular economy.
For example, in 2021, we are opening two new power tool plants and 1 new hand tool facility in North America.
We have made progress in 2021 and are on our way to securing the chips and the throughput to support at least 25% growth in our electronic component supply for 2022.
Finally, we are leveraging our Industry 4.0 capabilities to drive manufacturing automation throughout many of our factories.
This resulted in 14% revenue growth with volume up 11%, price up 2% and currency contributing an additional point.
The operating margin rate for the segment was 15.7%, down from 21.5% in the third quarter of last year as volume, price, productivity and benefits from innovation were more than offset by accelerating transit costs incurred to meet the strong market demand.
All regions delivered organic growth, with North America up 9%, Europe up 20% and emerging markets up 28%.
This performance was supported across all markets as the secular The strong professional-driven demand was also demonstrated in the commercial and industrial channels posting 15% growth versus the prior year.
The region grew 17% organically with a standout e-commerce outperformance, up 43% versus the prior year.
In addition to a notable DEWALT brand strength performance, which achieved 27% growth.
All markets are consistently contributing to share gains, including 36% organic growth in Latin America and 22% organic growth in Asia.
Finally, our enterprisewide e-commerce strategic growth initiative continues to deliver strong results with third quarter global e-commerce revenue up nearly 20% versus 2020.
Power Tools delivered 11% organic growth, which was supported by the new and innovative product launches across CRAFTSMAN, DEWALT and Stanley FatMax.
All regions contributed to an 11% organic growth performance.
Notably, global sales were up over 50% year-to-date as compared to 2020.
Finally, hand tools, accessories and storage grew 16% organically, fueled by a robust market demand and new product introductions across our key construction, auto and industrial markets.
Also during the quarter, the Tools & Storage team was awarded 46 Pro Tool Innovation Awards, representing best-in-class products in the construction industry.
Segment revenue expanded by 1%, as two points of price and 1 point of currency was partially offset by one point of volume and one point from an oil and gas product line divestiture.
Operating margin was 7.9%, down versus 12.3% in the third quarter of last year as the benefits from price and productivity were more than offset by commodity inflation, growth investments and volume declines in higher-margin automotive and aerospace fasteners.
Looking further within this segment, Engineered Fastening organic revenues were down 1% as strong general industrial growth of 23% was offset by market-driven aerospace declines and lower automotive OEM production, resulting from the global semiconductor shortage.
Our auto fastener growth outperformed light vehicle production by approximately 15 points for the quarter and year-to-date periods.
Infrastructure organic revenues were up 7%, as 16% growth in attachment tools was partially offset by lower pipeline project activity in oil and gas.
Total revenue was up 5%, with 7% volume and 1 point contributions from price, currency and acquisitions, which was partially offset by a five point decline related to the international divestitures completed in the third quarter of last year.
North America was up 12% organically, driven by strong backlog conversion in commercial electronic security and solid growth within automatic doors and healthcare.
Order rates globally grew 14% in the third quarter, resulting in the third consecutive record quarter end backlog.
Overall Security segment profit rate, excluding charges, was 9.2%, down versus the prior year rate of 11% as price and volume gains were more than offset by costs, pandemic-related inefficiencies and growth investments such as SaaS solutions, touchless door technology and other health and safety options.
Third quarter free cash flow was a use of cash of $125 million, which brings our year-to-date results to a use of cash of $31 million.
Let's now move to page 12 and dive into the supply chain.
Compared to our July guidance, key commodity inputs such as steel, resins and purchase components accelerated throughout the third quarter, contributing an incremental $100 million in costs.
Average transit time from Asian suppliers to the North American manufacturing facilities and distribution centers have increased more than twofold from approximately 40 days to 85.
Combined, these container and transit cost impacts added an additional $130 million of cost pressure.
These underlying assumptions raise our full year commodity and supply chain headwinds to an estimate of approximately $690 million.
Assuming the known impacts continue, we also are forecasting approximately $600 million to $650 million of carryover cost headwinds for 2022.
We've also completed the price increases that we discussed with you in July and have recently taken further actions, which include communicating a new 5% surcharge in our North America Tools and Outdoor business, and further price increases across all of our businesses and regions during the fourth quarter.
And then finally, we continue to advance our margin resiliency initiatives and anticipate $100 million to $150 million of opportunity in 2022, which we can leverage to offset incremental headwinds, further invest in the business or contribute to margin outperformance.
Our updated full year 2021 guidance calls for organic revenue growth of 16% to 17%.
And at the midpoint, adjusted earnings per share expansion of 22% versus the prior year and 31% versus 2019.
On a GAAP basis, we expect the earnings per share range to be $10.20 up to $10.45, inclusive of various onetime charges related to facility moves, deal and integration costs and functional transformation initiatives.
On an adjusted basis, we are moderating the earnings per share outlook to $10.90 up to $11.10 from the previous range of $11.35 to $11.65.
The key assumption changes to the company's prior earnings per share outlook includes the following 4 items: one, an incremental $230 million in commodity, transit and labor inflation, which is approximately $1.25 reduction to EPS; two, recent currency movements have resulted in a $0.
15 negative earnings per share for 2021; three, these pressures will be partially mitigated by our incremental pricing actions and other actions, which add an incremental $0.30 to EPS; and then four, the benefit of a lower full year tax rate and other below-the-line assumption will contribute approximately $0.6 0 of improvement to EPS.
Lastly, the company expects free cash flow to be approximately $1.1 billion to $1.3 billion, which contemplates capex investment levels to be between 3% to 3.5% of revenue.
So in summary, our revised guidance calls for consistent revenue expectations, generating organic growth of 16% to 17% and approximately 22% adjusted earnings per share expansion for the company in 2021.
We are also actively addressing the inflationary environment with pricing actions that should result in 3.5 to 4 points of price next year and will allow us to move -- to more than fully recover the carryover impacts from inflation experienced in the second half of 2021.
We believe this price and inflation dynamic can be a positive carryover benefit of approximately $0.20 of earnings per share in 2022.
These factors added together should generate approximately $0.90 to $1.
10 of earnings per share accretion.
Additionally, MTD and Excel is expected to generate $0.50 of earnings per share and combined with the prior factors can result in significant double-digit earnings per share growth from operations.
Below the line, we are assuming a $0.50 headwind, primarily from the tax benefit in 2021 which will not repeat next year.
So to summarize, with the current inflation and demand environment, we are programming the business to deliver $1 of earnings per share growth versus our 2021 guidance.
When we deliver the organic growth in 2022 that Don discussed and when we closed the outdoor transactions, in combination, we will have added $6 billion of growth in the 2021, 2022 time period against a 2020 base of $14 billion.
That is over 40% growth.
