Earlier today, we released our third quarter results, reported strong consolidated adjusted local currency revenue growth of 13% and double-digit adjusted EBITDA growth for the quarter.
Flavors & Extracts group had another outstanding quarter reporting 12% adjusted local currency revenue growth and 16% adjusted local currency profit growth.
Color group had a strong quarter delivering 18% adjusted local currency revenue growth and 15% adjusted local currency profit growth, with our Food and Pharmaceutical Colors business and our Personal Care businesses both contributing to the Color Group's strong quarter.
Asia-Pacific delivered 10% adjusted local currency revenue growth and 11% adjusted local currency operating profit growth.
Flavors & Extracts group had another great quarter with 12% adjusted local currency revenue growth and 16% adjusted local currency profit growth.
The performance this quarter is on top of last year's strong third quarter performance of 13% adjusted local currency revenue growth and 24% adjusted local currency operating profit growth.
The integration of this business is proceeding as planned and the business contributed approximately $2.4 million of revenue to the Flavors & Extracts group in the third quarter.
The group's adjusted operating profit margin increased 50 basis points in the quarter and has increased 70 basis points year-to-date.
We are well on track to achieve the 50 to 100 basis point improvement that we forecasted for the year and we expect good performance in the fourth quarter and into next year.
The Color Group had a terrific quarter, delivering 18% adjusted local currency revenue growth and 15% adjusted local currency profit growth.
The Asia Pacific Group delivered 10% adjusted local currency revenue growth and 11% adjusted local currency profit growth in the quarter.
I continue to expect the Flavors & Extracts group to deliver mid-single digit revenue growth and 50 to 100 basis points of annual improvement to the operating profit margin for the foreseeable future.
I also expect the Color Group to deliver mid-single digit revenue growth along with an operating profit margin above 20%.
Our third quarter GAAP diluted earnings per share was $0.80, included in these results are approximately $0.04 per share of divestiture costs and the cost of the operational improvement plan.
In addition, our GAAP earnings per share this quarter include approximately $1.6 million of revenue and an immaterial amount of operating income related to the results of the divested operations.
Last year's third quarter GAAP results include divestiture and operational improvement plan costs, which decreased last year's third quarter results by approximately $0.03 per share.
In addition, our GAAP earnings per share in the third quarter of 2020 include approximately $23.6 million of revenue and approximately $0.04 per share of earnings related to the divested product lines.
Excluding these items, consolidated adjusted revenue was $342.7 million, an increase of 13% in local currency compared to the third quarter of 2020.
Our adjusted local currency EBITDA was up 12.9% for the quarter and our adjusted local currency earnings per share was up 9.1% for the quarter.
The acquisition of Flavor Solutions contributed $2.4 million of revenue and an immaterial amount of operating income to our third quarter results.
We still expect our capital expenditures to be around $65 million for the year.
During the third quarter, we completed the acquisition of Flavor Solutions for approximately $15 million.
We also purchased approximately $9 million of company stock for 105,600 shares in the quarter, which brings our year-to-date total purchases to $32 million or 383,000 shares.
We have 1.8 million shares remaining under our share repurchase authorization.
Our leverage ratio is now 2.0 times debt adjusted EBITDA, down from 2.6 a year ago, leaving our balance sheet in a solid position to support potential acquisition, share repurchases, as well as our dividend payout.
Yesterday, we announced a 5% increase in our dividend.
We have increased our quarterly dividend by 37% since 2016, resulting in a compound annual growth rate of 6.4%.
Based on current trends and the current tax law, we are reconfirming our previously issued GAAP earnings per share guidance, which calls for mid to high single digit growth compared to our 2020 reported GAAP earnings per share of $2.59.
Our full year guidance for 2021 includes approximately $0.25 of divestiture related costs, operational improvement plan costs and the impact of the divested businesses.
Our reported results include the impact of currency and based on current exchange rates, we expect our earnings to benefit by approximately $0.07 due to currency for the year.
