Our Flavors & Extract group had another outstanding quarter reporting 9% adjusted local currency revenue growth and 13% adjusted local currency operating profit growth.
Our Personal Care business rebounded substantially contributing to the Color Groups 7% adjusted local currency revenue growth and 5% adjusted local currency profit growth.
Asia Pacific had another strong quarter, delivering 11% adjusted local currency revenue growth and over 22% adjusted local currency operating profit growth.
On a consolidated basis, we reported 9% consolidated adjusted local currency revenue growth and mid-single-digit adjusted EBITDA growth in the quarter.
Flavors & Extracts Group had another outstanding quarter with 9% adjusted local currency revenue growth and 13% adjusted local currency profit growth.
The group's adjusted operating profit margin increased 50 basis points in the quarter compared to last year's second quarter.
We are well on track to achieve 50 basis points to 100 basis point improvement to operating profit margin this year.
The Color Group had an exceptional rebound this quarter, delivering 7% adjusted local currency revenue growth and 5% adjusted local currency profit growth.
The Asia Pacific Group delivered 11% adjusted local currency revenue growth and 22% adjusted local currency profit growth.
Over the long term, I continue to expect Flavors & Extracts to deliver mid-single-digit revenue growth and 50 basis points to 100 basis points annual improvement to operating profit margin over the foreseeable future.
I also expect the Color Group to deliver mid-single-digit revenue growth, along with an operating profit margin at or above 20%.
Our second quarter GAAP diluted earnings per share was $0.61.
Included in these results are $7 million or approximately $0.16 per share of costs related to the divestitures and the cost of the operational improvement plan.
In addition, our GAAP earnings per share this quarter include approximately $2.2 million of revenue or $0.01 of costs related to the results of the divested operations.
The combination of these items were included within the divestiture and other related costs, which increased last year's second quarter net earnings by $1 million or approximately $0.02 per share.
In addition, our GAAP earnings per share in the second quarter of 2020 include approximately $28.2 million of revenue and an immaterial amount of net earnings related to the divested product lines.
Excluding these items, consolidated adjusted revenue was $333.6 million, an increase of 9.1% in local currency compared to the second quarter of 2020.
Our adjusted local currency EBITDA was up approximately 6% for the quarter, and our adjusted local currency earnings per share was up 8.6% for the quarter.
In terms of capital expenditures, we continue to expect our spend to be around $65 million for the year.
During the second quarter, we bought back approximately $11 million of company's stock.
Our leverage ratios are 2 times debt-to-adjusted EBITDA, down from 2.7 a year ago, leaving our balance sheet in a solid position to support potential acquisitions, share repurchases as well as our dividend payout.
Our GAAP earnings per share guidance calls for mid-to-high single-digit growth compared to our 2020 reported GAAP earnings per share of $2.59.
Our full-year guidance for 2021 includes approximately $0.25 of divestiture-related costs, operational improvement plan costs and the impact of the divested businesses.
On an adjusted basis, our earnings per share guidance for the year calls for mid-single-digit local currency growth compared to our 2020 adjusted earnings per share of $2.79.
Based on current corporate tax law, we expect our adjusted tax rate to be approximately 22% for the last six months of 2021.
And based on current exchange rates, we expect our earnings to benefit by approximately $0.10 due to currency for the year.
