That is true every quarter, but it has been especially important in the past 18 months as the world have dealt with the unprecedented challenges brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic.
As a result of the strong execution in both segments, second quarter 2021, operating margins, improved dramatically to 11.8% for the company, with both segments, delivering double-digit operating margins.
This represents a 170 basis point adjusted operating margin improvement on revenues, 20% lower than the second quarter of 2019.
Our intense focus on networking capital management and improved profitability drove $101 million of positive free cash flow in the quarter.
And more than $140 million of free cash flow year-to-date.
We expect our SG&A as a percentage of sales to be below our target of 12.5% for the full year 2021.
Overall revenues of $1 billion were up 50% year-over-year with both of our operating segments revenues up significantly.
For the quarter, we recorded an operating profit of $123 million compared to only $7 million in the second quarter of last year.
We achieved an operating margin of approximately 12% from disciplined cost control and fulfilling as much customer demand as possible, given the realities of the global supply chain during the quarter.
The second quarter operating profit does include $4 million of benefits from the release of a financing receivable reserve and the recording about that receivable related to prior years, offset by a $1 million charge for business impairment and restructuring.
Interest and other expense was approximately $22 million higher than Q2 of last year driven by $26 million of costs in connection with the refinancing of a significant portion of our capital structure, offset by $4 million in interest savings.
Our second quarter 2021 global effective tax rate was approximately 17% driven by a mix of discrete items in the quarter.
Our tax rate estimate for the full year remains 19% consistent with our previous outlook.
Finally, our reported earnings per share of $1.02 per share includes $23 million of interest charges and other callouts that I just discussed had amounted to $0.26 per share reduction in earnings per share in the quarter.
AWP sales of $595 million were up 44% compared to last year, driven by a dramatic improvement in all our global markets.
Second quarter bookings of $747 million were up dramatically compared to Q2 2020 while backlog at quarter end was $1.4 billion, close to 3 times the prior year.
Sales of $441 million were up 67% compared to last year, driven by strong customer sentiment across all end markets and geographies.
The MP team has been aggressively managing all elements of cost as end markets improve, resulting in an operating margin above 15%.
Backlog of $868 million more than tripled from last year and was up 22% sequentially.
MP saw its business has strengthened through the quarter with bookings up approximately 160% year-over-year.
We continue to plan for total company incremental margins for the full year 2021, which meet or exceed our 25% target.
As a result of positive first half callouts, corporate and other costs are expected to be slightly higher in the second half versus the first half of the year, including $0.26 per share of cost for refinancing of our capital structure and the other callouts in Q2.
Our full year earnings per share outlook is increased to $2.85 to $3.05 per share based on sales of approximately $3.9 billion.
For the full year 2021, we are estimating free cash flow of approximately $200 million, reflecting a strong year on positive cash generation.
Full year free cash flow includes approximately $75 million from income and VAT tax refunds, which are not expected to reoccur.
During the first half of 2021, we received approximately $35 million of these refunds.
We continue to plan for capital expenditures, net of asset disposition of approximately $90 million.
The strong, positive free cash flow of $101 million in the quarter demonstrates the focus and discipline our team members continue to demonstrate to tightly manage net working capital.
We have over $1.1 billion available to us with no near-term debt maturities, so we can manage and grow the business.
Our strong liquidity position and cash generation allowed us to prepay $83 million of term loans during Q2, which is in addition to the $196 million of term loans prepaid in early February.
