Sales grew 24% year-over-year, driven by 17% non-residential sales growth and 36% residential sales growth, as we continue to execute at both ADS and Infiltrator in a favorable demand environment.
It was very encouraging to see the demand in our non-residential end market increase 17% this quarter.
In addition, allied product sales in the non-residential market increased 23%, giving us confidence in the underlying market strength.
We also continue to experience strength in our residential market with 36% growth in the quarter, driven by favorable dynamics in new home construction, repair/remodel and on-site septic, accelerated by the material conversion strategies at both businesses.
The retail market, which is roughly 25% of our residential sales, continues to experience strong growth as well with the continued strength in remodeling and home improvement.
Sales in the agriculture market increased 33% this quarter, driven by the programs we put in place around organizational changes, new product introductions, and improving execution as well as favorable weather and market dynamics.
International sales also increased 18%, primarily driven by double-digit growth in our Canadian business, which represents about 70% of the international revenue.
Finally, Infiltrator continues to exceed expectations with 37% sales growth in the third quarter.
Adjusted EBITDA margin increased 540 basis points overall in our first full quarter of comparable results from the Infiltrator acquisition.
We are certainly fortunate that as part of the construction industry supply chain, we could manufacture and ship our products over the last 12 months without significant interruption.
The very strong 24% revenue growth we reported this quarter was driven by both volume and pricing as well as strong growth across both our ADS legacy and Infiltrator businesses as well as in each of our end markets and product applications.
The 52% growth in consolidated adjusted EBITDA was driven not only by this strong topline growth, but by favorable material costs, operational efficiency initiatives as well as our synergy programs.
Our year-to-date free cash flow increased by $141 million to $391 million as compared to $250 million in the prior year.
Our working capital decreased to 16% of sales, down from 19% of sales last year.
In addition, we ended the quarter in a very favorable liquidity position, with $224 million of cash and $339 million available under our revolving credit facility, bringing our total liquidity to $563 million.
It is also worth noting that our trailing 12-month leverage ratio is now 1.1 times.
Based on our performance to date, order activity, backlog and current market trends, we currently expect net sales to be in the range of $1.915 billion to $1.950 billion, representing growth of 14% to 17% over last year.
Adjusted EBITDA to be in the range of $550 million to $565 million, representing growth of 52% to 56% over last year.
And we expect to convert our adjusted EBITDA to free cash flow at a rate of greater than 60% for the full year.
