If you recall, the Andre the Giant documentary from 2018 was not only the highest-rated sports documentary on HBO in the last 15 years, but was the highest-rated documentary on HBO in the last 15 years.
2.4 million total viewers watch content across all tiers, representing a 60% increase.
And those viewers watched 37 million hours of content, which was an 8% increase.
Perhaps more importantly, average paid subscribers to the network increased by 6% to $1.6 million.
WrestleMania went from a sold-out Raymond James stadium in Tampa, Florida, with over 80,000 people to a two-night event at our performance center with no one in attendance.
On August 21, we launched what we call WWE ThunderDome.
We partnered with the famous group to bring nearly 1,000 live virtual fans back to our show.
And we have seen a lift in the ratings of 6% for Raw and 12% for Smackdown as compared to the prior four weeks without fans.
The CWC launched on October four for NXT's live special Takeover 31.
And as more and more people started to gravitate to streaming platforms, we adjusted our digital posting strategy to incorporate new original content, longer matches versus clips, and resurfaced high-performing historical content across YouTube, Facebook and WWE Network, resulting in increased digital views of 28% excluding the impact of geographical restrictions in India.
We recently surpassed 50 billion views on YouTube, making WWE the fifth most viewed YouTube channel in the world.
WWE generated third quarter revenue of $221.6 million, up 19% and adjusted OIBDA of $84.3 million, up more than 2 times, both were driven primarily by higher rights fees from U.S. distribution agreements.
During the quarter, WWE executed a reduction in force, resulting in severance expense of $5.5 million.
Looking at the WWE media segment, adjusted OIBDA increased approximately $60 million to $101.7 million, primarily due to higher domestic rights fees for Raw and Smackdown programs.
Despite a challenging environment, WWE continued to produce a significant amount of content, more than 550 hours of programming for television, streaming and social digital platforms.
Although third quarter ratings for Raw and Smackdown declined 29% and 2%, respectively, they showed improvement from July to September.
And they achieved this result despite unprecedented competition from the return of major sports, such as the NBA, NFL, MLB and including playoffs and Premier events, such as the Kentucky Derby and the Indy 500.
Adjusted OIBDA from live events declined by $1.2 million to a loss of $4.1 million due to a $22.5 million decline in live event revenue.
Licensing revenue reflected a 25% sales increase from the franchise game, WWE 2K20 and continue to benefit from the build-out of WWE's video game and toy portfolios.
As of September 30, 2020, WWE held approximately $638 million in cash and short-term investments.
This includes $200 million borrowed under WWE's revolving credit facility to ensure the necessary capital to execute the company's strategy and deliver long-term value to our shareholders.
In the third quarter, WWE generated approximately $111 million in free cash flow, an increase of $127 million.
WWE anticipates $40 million to $45 million in incremental fourth quarter expenses versus the third quarter.
This is due to $22 million to $27 million from, one, incremental production expenses associated with the creation of WWE ThunderDome and Capitol Wrestling Center; and two, incremental personnel expenses associated with employees returning from furlough.
Also contributing to the incremental increase in expenses is that WWE booked $18 million in production incentives in the third quarter 2020.
Given the lack of visibility, WWE did not buy back any stock in the third quarter under its $500 million stock repurchase program, but may resume activity on an opportunistic basis in the future.
