I'm excited to share our strong second quarter results as we delivered record second quarter unit development and 23% same-store sales growth.
We are raising our previous guidance of 4% unit growth to between 4% and 5% unit growth.
As a reminder, our long-term growth algorithm includes 2% to 3% same-store sales growth and mid to high single-digit system sales growth leading to high single-digit core operating profit growth.
system sales grew 26%, driven by 23% same-store sales growth.
Importantly, same-store sales grew 4% on a two-year basis, which includes the impact of approximately 700 or about 1% of our stores being temporarily closed due to COVID as of the end of Q2 2021.
Even more exciting is the extremely strong net new unit growth of 603 units that we delivered during the quarter, which was both broad-based and record-setting.
Looking across the more than 150 countries in which we operate, we've seen that while the overall global trend is positive, the recovery will neither be consistent from country to country nor linear within a country.
We delivered a second quarter record with over $5 billion in digital sales, a 35% increase over the prior year.
Even more exciting, for the first time, on a trailing 12-month basis, we delivered more than $20 billion in digital sales.
We're seeing significant uptick in frequency and higher spend per visit, leading to an increase in overall spend of 35% for active customers in the Taco Bell rewards program compared to their pre-loyalty behavior.
Starting with the KFC division, which accounts for approximately 51% of our divisional operating profit, Q2 system sales grew 35%, driven by 30% same-store sales growth and 5% unit growth.
For the division, Q2 same-store sales grew 2% on a two-year basis, which includes the impact of about 1% of our stores being temporarily closed as of the end of Q2 2021.
At KFC International, same-store sales grew 36% during the quarter.
Same-store sales declined 1% on a two-year basis, which includes the impact of about 2% of our stores being temporarily closed as of the end of Q2 2021.
Next, at KFC U.S., we continued to see strong momentum, with 11% same-store sales growth in Q2.
Importantly, same-store sales grew 19% on a two-year basis, owing to the continued strength of our group occasion business, the digital capabilities mentioned earlier, and our new chicken sandwich.
Moving on to Pizza Hut, which accounts for approximately 17% of our divisional operating profit.
The division reported Q2 system sales growth of 10%, driven by 10% same-store sales growth.
While the division had a 3% unit decline versus last year, driven by the elevated COVID-related dislocations and closures of 2020, it has sustained its positive 2021 development momentum, delivering 1% unit growth relative to Q1.
Global Q2 same-store sales grew 1% on a two-year basis, which includes the impact of about 2% of our stores being temporarily closed as of the end of Q2 2021.
Overall, Pizza Hut International same-store sales grew 16%.
Same-store sales declined 6% on a two-year basis, which includes the impact of about 2% of our stores being temporarily closed as of the end of Q2 2021.
Importantly, the off-premise channel achieved 21% same-store sales growth on a two-year basis for the quarter and delivery continued to be the primary driver of growth as the shift toward an off-premise model continues in most of our Pizza Hut markets.
At Pizza Hut U.S., we continue to see positive same-store sales with 4% overall same-store sales growth.
On a two-year basis, the off-premise channel grew 18% and overall same-store sales grew 9%, which includes the impact of about 1% of our stores being temporarily closed as of the end of Q2 2021.
As for Taco Bell, which accounts for approximately 31% of our divisional operating profit, Q2 system sales grew 24%, driven by a 21% same-store sales growth and 2% unit growth.
For the division, Q2 same-store sales grew 12% on a two-year basis.
The quarter kicked off with the return of the Quesalupa as part of the fan-favorite $5 Chalupa Cravings Box, followed by the relaunch of the iconic Naked Chicken Chalupa.
We generated over 2 billion impressions and step-change brand awareness, especially in our international markets where we have a tremendous run rate for growth.
And finally, the Habit Burger Grill delivered 31% same-store sales growth and 6% unit growth.
Q2 same-store sales grew 7% on a two-year basis.
Importantly, digital sales continued to mix over 35%, only a modest pullback from Q1, even as dining rooms continued reopening and dine-in sales saw a steady improvement throughout the quarter.
system sales grew 26%, driven by 23% same-store sales growth.
On a two-year basis, same-store sales grew 4%, which includes the negative impact of about 1% of our stores being temporarily closed due to COVID as of the end of Q2 2021.
We delivered 2% unit growth year-over-year, which included a Q2 record of 603 net new units.
EPS, excluding special items, was $1.16, representing a 41% increase compared to ex-special earnings per share of $0.82 in Q2 2020.
Core operating profit grew 53% in the second quarter, driven by accelerated same-store sales growth in several developed markets at KFC, the combination of strong sales and restaurant margin growth at Taco Bell and a year-over-year benefit associated with reserves for franchisee accounts receivable.
At Taco Bell, company restaurant margins were 25.9%, 1.4 points higher than prior year.
These recoveries resulted in a $4 million net benefit to operating profit related to bad debt during the quarter, representing a $17 million year-over-year tailwind to operating profit growth as we lapped $13 million of expense in Q2 2020.
As a reminder, we ended 2020 with $12 million of full-year bad debt expense with large quarterly swings due to COVID.
As such, we expect year-over-year operating profit growth to be negatively impacted in the second half as we lap bad debt recoveries of $21 million and $8 million in Q3 and Q4, respectively.
General and administrative expenses were $230 million.
We now estimate that our consolidated G&A expenses will be approximately $1 billion for the full year 2021, a slight increase from our Q1 estimate attributable to increased incentive-based compensation.
Reported interest expense was $159 million, an increase of 21% compared to Q2 2020, driven by a special item charge of $34 million related to early redemption of restricted group bonds during the quarter.
Interest expense, ex-special, was approximately $125 million, a decrease of 5%, driven by recent refinancing actions and the elimination of revolver balances held in the prior year.
We still expect our 2021 interest expense to be approximately $500 million, excluding the previously mentioned $34 million special item charge similar to 2020.
Capital expenditures, net of refranchising proceeds, were $16 million for the quarter.
As we've discussed on prior earnings calls, we believe roughly $250 million in annual gross capex appropriately balances the inherent needs of the business, with opportunities to invest in technology initiatives and strategic development of equity stores.
We still anticipate at least $50 million in annual proceeds from refranchising, which will fund the strategic equity store investments.
Their improvements are fueled by continued adoption of frictionless restaurant technology, including our in-house intelligent coaching app called HutBot that launched at the end of 2020 and is now live in 40 markets, covering 4,000 restaurants.
Speed for Q2 was six seconds faster than Q2 2020 and our teams served 4 million more cars compared to the same quarter last year.
Our net new unit growth of 603 during the quarter was broad based across brands and geographies, making this not only a record quarter, but also capping a record first half.
Most notably, KFC opened 428 net new units during the quarter with significant builds in China, Russia, India, Latin America, and Thailand, contributing to 5% unit growth year-over-year.
Pizza Hut has sustained its positive 2021 development momentum, delivering 1% unit growth relative to Q1, underpinned by the strength in gross openings and moderating store closures.
Pizza Hut opened 99 net new units during the quarter, led by strong development in China, India, and Asia.
Taco Bell opened 74 net new units and we're excited to share that Taco Bell International had its best development quarter ever, opening 30 net new units led by Spain and the U.K. In the U.S., we opened our flagship Taco Bell Cantina in Times Square, with a digital forward footprint and personalized experience.
Overall, we are pleased with the momentum in the first half of the year and we're extremely proud to announce 4% to 5% unit growth guidance, led by development from all four brands across our footprint.
We ended Q2 with cash and cash equivalents of approximately $552 million, excluding restricted cash.
The strong recovery in EBITDA during Q2 drove our consolidated net leverage down to approximately 4.5 times, temporarily below our target of approximately 5 times.
During the quarter, we repurchased 2.1 million shares, totaling $255 million at an average price per share of $119.
Year-to-date, we've repurchased $530 million of shares at an average price of $112.
