Now we're doing all this while continuing to pursue opportunities with our natural gas assets to firm up deliverability and supply to our customers, opportunities that were highlighted by the recent winter storm in Texas, and also while examining opportunities in the energy transition effort.
At Kinder Morgan, we remain guided by what we believe is a sound corporate philosophy, fund our capital needs internally, maintain a healthy balance sheet, and return excess cash to our shareholders through dividend increases and opportunistic share repurchases.
And we have accomplished that while maintaining a real focus on our balance sheet, having reduced our debt from its peak of almost $43 billion in 2015 to $30.7 billion today, a decrease of over $12 billion, quite an improvement.
And that was driven primarily by declines in Rockies production, increase in transportation alternatives, and lower production out of the Permian, those two things impacting our volumes on EPNG and contract expiration on our joint venture pipe coming out of the Fayetteville.
A key difference between our Texas intrastate system and our interstate gas pipeline systems is that we have a purchase and sale business in Texas, supported by high deliverability storage assets.
While we view the events in our financial results as largely nonrecurring, we are already pursuing more long-term firm capacity sales and some associated capital investments that will help our customers to be even better positioned for future extreme weather and create incremental value for Kinder Morgan.
These declines were partially offset by higher volumes, which were driven by increased deliveries to LNG export facilities, winter weather in the northeast, and the PHP in service.
We also purchased additional gas, some at very high prevailing prices, to serve power plants and gas utilities.
We performed well operationally and commercially across our entire gas network, but our financial performance was especially strong in our Texas intrastate pipeline and storage network.
I'll focus on our performance during Winter Storm Uri, which is what drove our financial results in the quarter.