As a result, we plan to accelerate our pace of new store openings for pOpshelf in 2021 and expect to incorporate this concept into a number of our larger format Dollar General locations as we look to capitalize on the significant growth opportunity we see for this differentiated concept.
Notably, on average, our DGP and new store formats are outperforming the chain on a comp sales basis and have considerably higher sales volumes compared to both the traditional and DGTP store, which bodes well for the future as we look to increase their unit counts in the years ahead.
At the same time, we remain focused on advancing our operating priorities and strategic initiatives as we continue to meet the evolving needs of our customers and further position Dollar General for long-term sustainable growth.
Of note, this represents our 11th consecutive quarter of year-over-year comp sales growth in our combined non-consumable categories, which we believe speaks to the strong and sustained momentum in these product categories.
Beginning later this year, this new format along with our DGP concept will become our base prototype for nearly all new stores, replacing both our traditional and higher, cooler count DGTP format, allowing for a more optimized assortment and room to accommodate future growth.
First, we plan to further the rollout of several value-creating initiatives, including our non-consumables initiative, Fast Track and the completion of our initial rollout of DG Fresh.
These factors were partially offset by: increased transportation and distribution costs, which were impacted by increased volume, some of which is attributable to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as higher transportation rates and discretionary employee bonus expense for our distribution center and private fleet employees.
In total, we invested approximately $248 million in response to the pandemic in 2020, including about $167 million in appreciation bonuses for eligible front-line employees to demonstrate our appreciation for their exceptional performance during an incredibly challenging year.
We are also pleased to highlight key changes to our development strategy, including plans to build on the success of our Dollar General Plus Store or DGP, and the introduction of two new store formats, which we began testing in 2020.
Finally, we are pleased to provide an update on a number of our new small box store opportunities we see available in the Continental United States, which represents an increase compared to our prior estimate.
Gross profit as a percentage of sales was 32.5% in the fourth quarter, an increase of 77 basis points, which represents our seventh consecutive quarter of year-over-year gross margin rate expansion.
Similar to our larger footprint, DGP concept, the first new format has selling space of approximately 8,500 square feet, which compares to about 7,300 square feet of selling space for our traditional store.
We're particularly pleased that we delivered significant operating margin expansion, which contributed the fourth quarter diluted earnings per share of $2.62, an increase of 24.8% over the prior year.