Our increased gross profit margin, combined with diligent expense control, increased our non-GAAP earnings per diluted share to $1.80, a 37.5% increase from the prior quarter, and generated strong cash flow from operations of $296.3 million.
The primary contributor to our record gross profit margin was a significant rebound in our tolling businesses that service the automotive market, which generally operate at higher gross profit margins than our companywide average.
While we expect that the impact of certain of these factors will be temporary, we believe our managers will continue to successfully leverage the significant investments we have made to expand our value-added processing capabilities to support a sustainable higher gross profit margin.
The 200 basis points improvement in our gross profit margin to a record 32.4% was the major highlight of our third quarter financial performance, which drove a 40.6% increase in our non-GAAP pre-tax income over the prior quarter.
In response to reduced commercial airline build rates that we expect to continue at low levels in the near term, we recorded impairment and restructuring charges related to facility closures, workforce reductions and a negative outlook at certain of our businesses servicing the commercial aerospace market.
Our gross profit margin expanded 200 basis points from the prior quarter to a record 32.4%, significantly exceeding our estimated sustainable range of 28% to 30% on net sales of $2.09 billion.
Metal pricing began to improve in the third quarter as mill price increases from many of the products we sell were implemented, with announcements for further price increases continuing into the fourth quarter.
Despite these mill price increases, our average selling price per ton sold in the third quarter was down 4.3% compared to the second quarter, primarily as a result of product mix changes that Karla will discuss in more detail.
We recorded LIFO income of $12.5 million or $0.15 of earnings per diluted share in the third quarter of 2020 compared to LIFO income of $40 million or $0.44 of earnings per share in the third quarter of 2019 and LIFO income of $5 million or $0.06 of earnings per share in the second quarter of 2020.
Improved demand in the major in the majority our end markets as the economy continued to slowly reopen following COVID-19-related shutdowns and project delays in the second quarter of 2020 drove this strength.
This ties our record gross profit margin set in the fourth quarter of 2019 when we recorded LIFO income of $81 million compared to LIFO income of $12.5 million in the current quarter.