I want to mention that the Board of Directors has approved the quarterly dividend of $0.30 per share for the third quarter, an increase of $0.02 per share or 7% from the second quarter, which is, we believe, is supported by our increased collection efforts in the second quarter, improving traffic in Waikiki at our Embassy Suites and our expectation for operations to continue trending favorably in the near term.
Our collections have continued to improve each quarter with a collection rate north of 96% for the second quarter.
Furthermore, we had approximately $850,000 of deferred rent due from tenants in Q2 based on COVID-19 related lease modifications.
And we have collected approximately 94% of those deferred amounts, further validating our strategy of supporting our struggling retailers through the government-mandated closures.
About half of our over 250,000 square feet of vacant retail space or in lease negotiations or LOI stage, deals that we believe we have a good likelihood of being finalized.
On the multifamily front, with new management in place at Hassalo, we are currently 99% leased and asking rents are trending up almost 20% since December 2020.
In San Diego, our multifamily properties are currently 97% leased, and we have leased approximately 90% of the 133 master lease units that expired less than two months ago and expect the remaining to be leased over the next few weeks.
Asking rents at our multifamily properties are trending up as well in San Diego, almost 10% since December 2020.
Last night, we reported second quarter 2021 FFO per share of $0.51 and second quarter '21 net income attributable to common stockholders per share of $0.15.
First, as Ernest previously mentioned, the Board has approved an increase in the dividend to its pre-COVID amount of $0.30 per share based on the continued improvement in our collections as expected, but the overriding factor was the strong results we are seeing at the Embassy Suites Hotel in Waikiki beginning in mid-June and increasing into July with a strong pent-up demand.
Q2 paid occupancy was 67%, and the month of June by itself reached approximately 83%.
The average daily rate was $274 for Q2 and approximately $316 for the month of June.
RevPAR or revenue per available room was $184 for Q2 and approximately $262 for the month of June.
The Oahu is still under tier five of its reopening plan until Hawaii's total population is 70% fully vaccinated, which should occur in the next month or two.
Bars and restaurants in Oahu can be at 100% capacity as long as all customers show their vaccination card or a negative COVID test on entry.
The Japanese wholesale market had accounted for approximately 35% to 40% of our customer base pre-COVID.
Japan is currently just 9% fully vaccinated.
Though with its current pace of over one million vaccines a day, Japan is expected to be completing vaccinations by this November and to start issuing vaccine passports in the next 30 days, in anticipation of opening up international travel.
Secondly, looking at our consolidated statement of operations for the three months ended June 30th, our total revenue increased approximately $7.8 million over Q1, which is approximately at 9.3% increase.
Approximately 37% of that was the outperformance of the Embassy Suites Hotel as California and Hawaii began to open up travel.
Additionally, our operating income increased approximately $6.3 million over Q1 '21, which is approximately an increase of 31%.
Third, same-store cash NOI overall was strong at 23% year-over-year.
Multifamily was down primarily as a result of Pacific Ridge Apartments at 71% leased at the end of Q2 due to the recurring seasonality of students leaving in May, including the expiration of the USD master lease and new students leasing over the summer before school starts in late August.
Generally, approximately 60% of our 533 units at Pacific Ridge are leased by students, with the USD campus right across the street.
As of this week, we are approximately 90% leased at Pacific Ridge with approximately 150 students moving in over the next several weeks in August.
Hassalo on Eighth in the Lloyd District of Oregon is a 657 multifamily campus.
At the end of Q1, occupancy was approximately 84% due to the lingering impact of COVID and political challenges in the prior months.
As of Q2, we have increased the occupancy to approximately 95%.
And fourth, as previously disclosed, we acquired Eastgate Office Park on July 7th, comprised of approximately 280,000 square foot multi-tenant office campus, in the premier I-90 corridor submarket of Bellevue, Washington, one of the top-performing markets in the nation, the Eastside market is anchored by leading tech, life science, biotech and telecommunication companies.
The four-building Eastgate Park is currently greater than 95% leased to a diversified tenant base with in-place contractual lease rates that we believe are 10% to 15% below prevailing market rates for the submarket.
Additionally, Eastgate Park recently obtained municipal approval for rezoning, increasing the floor area ratio from 0.5 to 1.0, which will allow for additional development opportunities.
The purchase price of approximately $125 million was paid with cash on the balance sheet.
The going-in cap rate was approximately 6% with an unlevered IRR north of 7%.
We believe this transaction will be accretive to FFO by approximately $0.05 for the remainder of 2021 and $0.10 for the entire year of 2022.
One last point of interest is that on page 16 of the supplemental, total cash net operating income, which is a non-GAAP supplemental earnings measure, which the company considers meaningful in measuring its operating performance is shown for the three months, ended June 30, at approximately $58.7 million.
If you use this as a run rate going forward, it would be approximately $234 million, which would exceed 2019 pre-COVID cash NOI of approximately $212 million.
At the end of the second quarter, we had liquidity of approximately $718 million, comprised of $368 million in cash and cash equivalents and $350 million of availability on our line of credit.
Our leverage, which we measure in terms of net debt-to-EBITDA was 6.0 times.
Our focus is to maintain our net debt-to-EBITDA at 5.5 times or below.
Our interest coverage and fixed charge coverage ratio ended the quarter at 3.7 times.
At the end of the second quarter, excluding One Beach, which is under redevelopment, our office portfolio stood at approximately 93% leased with less than 1% expiring through the end of 2021.
Our top 10 office tenants represented 51% of our total office-based rent.
Q2 portfolio stats by region were as follows, our San Francisco and Portland office portfolios were stable at 100% and 96% leased, respectively.
City Center Bellevue was 93% leased, net of a new amenity space under development, and San Diego is 91% leased, net of new amenity spaces being added to Torrey Reserve.
We had continued success in Q2 preserving pre-COVID rental rates with, 13 comparable new and renewal leases, totalling approximately 50,000 rentable square feet, with an over 9% increased over prior rent on a cash basis, and almost 15% increase on a straight-line basis.
The weighted average lease term on these leases was 3.6 years, with just over $7 per rentable square foot in TIs and incentives.
We experienced a modest small tenant attrition during the quarter due to COVID, resulting in a net loss of approximately 16,000 rentable square feet or less than 0.5 point of occupancy, none of which was lost to a competitor.
Our outlook moving forward is one of positive net absorption with 200 proposal activity picking up significantly.
The final phase of the renovation will include a new state of the art fitness complex and conference center, both serving the entire 14 building Torrey Reserve Campus.
Construction is in full swing on the redevelopment of One Beach Street in San Francisco, delivering in the first half of 2022, and construction is nearly complete on the redevelopment of 710 Oregon Square in the Lloyd Submarket of Portland.
One Beach will grow to over 103,000 square feet and 710 Organ Square will add another 32,000 square feet to the office portfolio.
