We also outperformed the high end of our expectations for fall leasing, achieving 95.8% opening occupancy and 3.8% average rental rate growth.
We delivered nearly 4,000 beds at our development serving the Disney College Program on schedule and within budget despite the national labor shortage and widespread supply chain constraints, bringing our total beds delivered at Disney to more than 6,000.
We expect to achieve originally targeted yields beginning in 2022 and to hit our 6.8% stabilized yield in 2023.
With regard to capital allocation activities, we successfully executed a well-timed $400 million bond offering, issuing seven-year senior unsecured notes at a yield of 2.26%.
And to cap the year off, we formed a joint venture with Harrison Street's social infrastructure platform to recapitalize a 45% interest in our existing 8-property Arizona State University student housing portfolio.
The transaction represented a 3.75% economic cap rate based on in-place rental revenue; escalated trailing operating expenses, including ground rent; and historic average capital expenditures.
The transaction produced an unlevered IRR of approximately 16%.
Our solid operational execution and prudent capital allocation activities resulted in earnings per share cumulatively exceeding quarterly expectations throughout the year by $0.18 per share or almost 10%, and full-year FFOM per share of $2.14 exceeded the high end of our most recent guidance by $0.02.
In addition, our stock ended the year at an all-time closing high of $57.29.
In stark contrast to the media's headlines pointing out that college enrollment has been decreasing with regard to the broadest universe of institutions of higher education, student demand to attend America's Tier 1 flagship universities, the ones we currently serve and target to do business, continues to experience growth and to set record levels of enrollment.
This includes first-year student enrollment growth at the highest levels in over 30 years.
And we are targeting normalized occupancy levels and attractive rent growth for the 2022-2023 academic year with our guidance including same-store rental revenue growth of 3.2% to 4.6% for the fourth quarter of 2022.
As we move into 2022, the company is firing on all cylinders with accelerating momentum as represented by our 2022 guidance, which represents earnings-per-share growth in the range of 12% to 16%.
This is even more impressive when considering that our guidance includes the effect of the $270 million first-phase closing of the ASU transaction and the fact that this growth is coming off of earnings for 2021 that exceeded the high end of our expectations.
