Against the backdrop of improving flows, AMG generated year-over-year growth of 26% in EBITDA and economic earnings per share of $4, representing the strongest third quarter in our history.
And we expect that these four affiliates will collectively contribute approximately $100 million in EBITDA in 2022.
AMG has been one of the most active investors in independent asset managers over the past 24 months.
Strong affiliate investment performance, organic growth, affiliate investments, and share repurchases combined to produce our third consecutive quarter of year-over-year earnings growth in excess of 20%, and AMG delivered net inflows as we continue to evolve our business mix toward secular growth areas.
For the quarter, adjusted EBITDA of $228 million grew 26% year over year and economic earnings per share totaled $4.
Net client cash inflows were $3.3 billion for the quarter and $6.8 billion, excluding certain quantitative strategies.
Turning to business performance by asset class and excluding certain quantitative strategies, in alternatives, we continue to see very strong fundraising levels across our private market managers, including Baring Asia, Pantheon, and Comvest with net inflows totaling $7.5 billion.
Net inflows were $1.4 billion, representing a continuation of the strong client demand trends we have seen against the backdrop of heightened market volatility.
Moving to global equities, we experienced net outflows of $1.2 billion, an improvement versus the second quarter.
Within U.S. equities, we reported net outflows of $1.3 billion.
Performance in this category is excellent, with more than 75% of assets outperforming benchmark on a three-year basis.
And finally, in multi-asset and fixed income, we generated inflows of $400 million as we continue to see steady growth in wealth management.
For the third quarter, adjusted EBITDA of $228 million, which includes $12 million of performance fees and net gains on strategic investments, grew 26% year over year, and economic earnings per share totaled $4.
We expect adjusted EBITDA to be in the range of $290 million to $340 million based on current AUM levels, which reflect our market blend up approximately 3% through Friday.
This guidance includes a seasonally higher performance fee range of $60 million to $100 million and the full impact of Parnassus in the fourth quarter.
Our share of interest expense was $29 million for the third quarter and we expect interest expense to remain at a similar level in the fourth quarter.
Controlling interest depreciation was $2 million in the third quarter and we expect the fourth quarter to be at a similar level.
Our share of reported amortization and impairments was $36 million for the third quarter and we expect it to be approximately $43 million in the fourth quarter, reflecting recent new investment activity.
Our effective GAAP and cash tax rates were 25% and 18%, respectively, for the third quarter, and we expect GAAP and cash tax rates to remain approximately at these levels.
Intangible-related deferred taxes were $12 million this quarter and are expected to be $12 million in the fourth quarter.
Other economic items were negative $7.5 million for the third quarter.
In the fourth quarter, for modeling purposes, we expect other economic items excluding any mark-to-market impact on GP and C to be $1 million.
Our adjusted weighted average share count for the third quarter was 42.2 million and we expect our share count to be approximately 41.7 million for the fourth quarter.
This was most recently evidenced by issuing a $200 million 40-year junior hybrid bond and completing a five-year extension of our $1.25 billion credit facility and our $350 million term loan.
And in the third quarter, we repurchased $100 million of shares, bringing our year-to-date total to $390 million.
In the fourth quarter, we expect to repurchase approximately $100 million of shares, subject to market conditions and new investments.
