These and other risks, uncertainties, and other important factors are just described in more detail in Franklin's recent filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including in the Risk Factors and the MD&A sections of Franklin's most recent Form 10-K and 10-Q filings.
We continue to operate our business effectively with over 95% of our employees working from home, broadly speaking, we are planning for a return to office in September, though our approach will be flexible and shaped by local requirement and the status of the pandemic in the countries where we do business.
Today, we are pleased to report financial results that reflect our continued progress with revenue growth and margin expansion, resulting in a 6% increase in adjusted operating income to $581 million.
Our financial flexibility remains strong, with cash and investments of $6.2 billion at March 31, net of $250 million of debt pay down in the quarter.
Our expanded distribution efforts drove an increase in gross sales of 32% from the prior quarter across a broad array of fund, vehicles, and asset classes led by US retail.
Long-term inflows increased by $15.9 billion or 19% quarter-over-quarter to $99.4 billion, excluding reinvested distribution.
Second-quarter long-term net outflows improved to $4.2 billion compared to $4.5 billion in the prior quarter.
Importantly, if you exclude reinvested distributions, net outflows improved by over $10 billion.
Alternative strategies grew by $4 billion to $131 billion in assets under management, with contributions from real estate, private credit, and retail alternatives.
Fixed income inflows increased by 27% to $53.5 billion from the prior quarter due to positive contributions from a diverse group of fixed income strategies, including Core Bond, Core Plus, and Corporate.
We are pleased that Western Asset experienced net inflows of almost $10 billion in the quarter, its highest level in over a decade.
Equity inflows were $32.4 billion, consistent with the prior quarter, excluding reinvested distributions.
As of this quarter's end, our institutional pipeline has increased with a combined total of won but unfunded mandates of $13 billion and is diversified across all asset classes.
