For reconciliations of our non-GAAP measure from the most comparable GAAP measure, I direct you to the release and supplemental information, which may be found at brookdale.com/investor and was furnished on an 8-K yesterday.
As of July 1, we further strengthened our liquidity position by over $300 million when we completed the 80% fail and smooth transition of our home health, hospice and outpatient therapy business to HCA Healthcare.
I believe our success with hosting over 2,000 vaccine clinics in four months enabled us to accelerate opening our communities and our occupancy recovery.
Our success with this pillar can be seen in our sequential occupancy growth in the assisted living, memory care segment, which is approximately 70% of our portfolio today.
The industry as reported by Nick show that the second quarter senior housing occupancy increased approximately 10 basis points on a sequential basis for stabilized portfolio.
For the second quarter on a same community basis, our senior housing occupancy grew to 90 basis points with assisted living and memory care occupancy increasing even faster at a 110 basis points on a sequential basis.
Second quarter weighted average occupancy was 70.4% up 90 basis points from the first quarter on the same community basis.
RevPAR or rates was 4.2% better on a year-over-year basis driven primarily by our annual price increase at the beginning of the year.
On the same community basis, the second quarter senior housing operating expense improved 6.1% year-over-year and was slightly favorable sequentially.
The primary driver of the favorability was a reduction of COVID-19 costs of approximately $45 million on a year-over-year basis and $17 million on a sequential basis.
With the transaction completed on July 1, going forward, the segment will be removed from consolidated results and the $306 million of net cash proceeds will be reported as net cash provided by investing activities.
Adjusted EBITDA for the second quarter was $33 million compared to $45 million for the prior year quarter.
Adjusted free cash flow was $168 million lower in the second quarter compared to the prior year period.
$146 million was related to the prior year quarter, when we received $85 million of Medicare Advanced Payments accepted $34 million Provider Relief Fund grants and benefited from $27 million of deferred payments under the payroll tax deferral program.
In addition for the current quarter, there was a $14 million use of cash for the initial repayment to the Medicare Advanced Payments program.
In the second quarter, non-development capex was $14 million higher than the prior year as we continue to make investments across our communities as planned.
As of June 30, total liquidity was $388 million compared to $439 million as of March 31.
On July 1, net proceeds from the sale of our healthcare services business would add $306 million to the quarter end liquidity.
Annual non-development capex investment is expected to remain at approximately $140 million for 2021.
And we will book approximately $5 million of state tax expense related to the healthcare services sale in the third quarter.
A notable increase in the senior population is beginning and nearly 65% of the target population lives within 20 minutes of a Brookdale community.
With this solid foundation for growth returning just to 2019 pre-pandemic occupancy and margin levels would drive over $300 million of additional NOI.
