Moving to Slide 4, I'd like to start, as we always do at Black Hills, with a focus on safety, the safety and the well-being of the people we work with and the communities we serve is paramount and we are committed to being on the forefront of safeguarding our co-workers and our customers at all times and especially now.
Moving to Slide 6, we had an excellent third quarter.
We executed operationally and exercised diligent expense management delivering a 32% increase in earnings over the same period last year.
Based on the strength of our earnings and outlook, we are increasing this year's earnings guidance to a range of $3.60 to $3.70 per share.
We're also introducing guidance for next year in the range of $3.75 to $3.95 per share, reflecting our expectation for solid growth year-over-year.
We've identified an additional $239 million of capital projects.
And that increases our total five-year forecast of $2.9 billion.
95% of that $2.9 billion will be invested in our utilities.
Slide 7 lists the excellent strategic progress we made this quarter.
Not only did we announce a 5.6% increase in our dividend, we also completed 50 consecutive years of annual dividend increases, a remarkable achievement that exemplifies our legacy of sustainable growth.
I'll start on Slide 9.
As Linn noted, we delivered strong financial performance for the quarter with earnings per share as adjusted of $0.58, up $0.14 from last year, driven by strong year-over-year Q3 results at our gas utilities.
We estimate weather positively impacted Q3 earnings per share by $0.05 compared to normal and by $0.11 compared to Q3 2019.
Results for the third quarter of this year include negative COVID impacts of approximately $0.03 per share, in line with our expectations.
Net income as adjusted increased 35% quarter-over-quarter, while earnings per share as adjusted increased 32% quarter-over-quarter, the difference driven by dilution from additional common shares outstanding from our equity issuance earlier this year.
On Slide 10, you see we increased our 2020 earnings guidance and initiated our 2021 earnings guidance, as Linn noted earlier in his remarks.
On Slide 11, we reconcile GAAP earnings to earnings as adjusted, a non-GAAP measure.
Slide 12 is a waterfall chart illustrating the primary drivers of our earnings results from third quarter of 2019 to third quarter of 2020.
Compared to normal for agricultural loads, last year's Q3 pre-tax margins were negatively impacted by approximately $5 million, while this year's Q3 pre-tax margins were positively impacted by approximately $2 million.
So we had a $7 million pre-tax swing related to the agricultural loads comparing Q3 2019 to Q3 2020.
When looking at weather overall for this year's Q3, including the agricultural impacts, our Electric Utilities gross margin benefited by $1.6 million pre-tax compared to normal and our Gas Utilities gross margin benefited by $2.6 million pre-tax compared to normal.
The combination of COVID net load impacts and forgiven late fees impacted our Utilities gross margin by approximately $1 million pre-tax.
Total O&M increased compared to the prior year, largely driven by a $2.4 million after-tax expense from the retirement of certain assets at our Power Generation segment.
Net COVID-related O&M of $800,000 after-tax resulted from higher bad debt expense accruals and sequestration of the essential employees, partially offset by lower costs related to travel, training and outside services.
We finalized certain regulatory proceedings around the TCJA during the third quarter and we're able to release associated reserve amounts, benefiting our Electric Utility gross margins by $1.5 million and income taxes by $2.1 million.
Slide 13 shows our financial position through the lens of capital structure, credit ratings and financial flexibility.
In February, we issued $100 million of equity to help support our 2020 capital investments.
You'll note in our 2021 guidance assumptions in the appendix we expect to issue $80 million to $100 million of equity through our at-the-market equity offering program in 2021.
We've mentioned previously the need to issue up to $50 million of equity in 2021 based on our previously disclosed forecast.
And the addition of $142 million to forecasted capital investments for 2020 and 2021 drives the increased equity need.
In June, we issued $400 million of 2.5% 10-year notes to term out our short-term debt and support our ongoing capital investment program, further enhancing our liquidity position.
At quarter end, we had $84 million of borrowings on our credit facility with no material debt maturities until late 2023.
As at the end of October, we continue to have over $600 million of liquidity available from capacity on our revolving credit facility.
Slide 14 illustrates our dividend growth track record.
We completed 50 consecutive years of increasing dividends in 2020 with strong and consistent increases in the past few years.
We maintain our target for a long-term dividend payout ratio of 50% to 60% of earnings per share, demonstrating our confidence in our long-term earnings growth prospects.
Moving to Slide 16.
Turning to our capital investment plan on Slide 17.
We added $239 million to our five-year forecast for a total of $2.9 billion focused on projects and initiatives that maintain customer safety and reliability and foster customer growth over the next five years.
For this year, we are increasing our capital investment by $64 million to $733 million and for next year, we're increasing our capital investment by $78 million to $633 million.
Going forward, we fully expect to invest at least $500 million annually to support our customers.
Slide 18 illustrates that our capital plan is utility focused with timely recovery on most of our investments.
95% of our forecasted investments are for our utilities and we anticipate 83% of our Gas Utility investments and 51% of our Electric Utility investments received timely recovery.
On the regulatory front, we've listed our current activity on Slide 19.
In other regulatory initiatives, we continue to advance our Renewable Advantage program to add up to 200 megawatts of renewable energy in Colorado.
We're currently negotiating with the winning bidder on a 200 megawatt solar project to be constructed in Pueblo, Colorado.
We're excited to complete our Renewable Ready subscription-based program for our South Dakota and Wyoming Electric Utilities, our 52.5 megawatt Corriedale wind project, we are building to support that program is nearly complete and we expect it to be in full service prior to year end.
In 2019, we provided over $5.5 million in charitable giving and we continue to support our strong commitment to the economic viability of our customers and our communities.
