On our call today, our review highlights from fiscal 21, outline our objectives for fiscal '22 and provide an update on our ESG initiatives.
In fact, our EBITDA increased by nearly 30% and earnings per share more than doubled.
At year end, our active lot opposition was up more than 25% versus the prior year.
Importantly, we also grew our share of lots controlled by option from about 35% to nearly 50%.
Over the course of the year, we retired more than $80 million of debt substantially improving our credit profile.
Over the past five years, we have grown EBITDA at a double digit compound annual growth rate substantially faster than our revenue growth, reduced net debt to EBITDA from over seven times to about three times and increased return on equity by more than 15 points.
First, we expect to grow EBITDA by more than 10% leading to earnings per share above $5.
Second, we expect double digit growth in our lot position, with lots controlled by options remaining around 50%.
Third, we expect to deliver a return on total equity of about 20% or nearly 25%, excluding our deferred tax assets.
And finally, we fully expect to achieve our long standing goal of reducing debt below $1 billion.
And importantly, we continue to make improvements in our designs, materials and construction practices, In support of our industry first pledge to have every home we build designated as net zero energy ready by the end of 2025.
On the social side, we've made significant progress on the rollout of charity title, our title business committed to contributing one 100% of its profits to charity.
In fiscal '22, we expect this expansion will allow us to donate more than $1 million allocated between our national philanthropic partner Fisher House, and other charities in the communities we serve.
For the full fiscal year, we generated net income of $122 million, or just over $4 of earnings per share, which benefited from $12 million of energy efficient tax credits.
Excluding these tax credits, our earnings per share would have been $3.61, more than double the prior year.
Adjusted EBITDA was about $263 million, up nearly 30% versus the prior year.
Gross margin, excluding amortized interest, impairments and abandonments was up about 200 basis points to 23%.
SG&A, as a percentage of total revenue decreased 50 basis points to 11.4%.
Interest amortize as percentage of homebuilding revenue was 4.1% down 40 basis points as we benefited from lower interest incurred, and our tax expense was about $22 million for an average annual tax rate of 15%.
Community count is expected to be around 115 essentially flat sequentially.
Closings should be between 1000, 1050 reflecting extended cycle times and our emphasis on delivering a spectacular customer experience.
ASP should be in high $430,000 range.
Gross Margin should be up between 125 and 150 basis points versus the same period last year.
SG& on an absolute dollar basis should be up about $4 million.
Land sale and other revenue should be about $7 million, with a margin of about 50%.
Within the ranges we provided for closes and margins, EBITDA should be above $50 million, or up around 15%.
Interest amortize as a percentage of homebuilding revenue should be in the mid threes and our tax rate should be approximately 25%.
While precision and earnings per share forecasting is difficult, we expect earnings per share to be up at least 50% versus the same period last year.
Looking forward to the full fiscal year, we expect to grow EBITDA by more than 10% in fiscal '22 and earn more than $5 per share.
Our improved profitability will be driven by the following factors, a significant increase in our average sales price to about $450,000 up over 10% versus fiscal 21, more than 100 basis points of operating margin improvement arising from a combination of increased gross margin and lower SG& as a percentage of total revenue and interesting amortize as a percentage of homebuilding revenue in the low 3% range as the benefit from our efforts to lower our cash interest expense continue to materialize.
We ended the fourth quarter with nearly $500 million of liquidity comprised of unrestricted cash of approximately $250 million and nothing outstanding on our revolver.
We have no significant maturities until 2025, and a clear path to bring debt below $1 billion in fiscal 22.
We spent over $245 million on land and development in the quarter, bringing our full year total spend to almost $600 million, up from less than 450 million in fiscal 2020.
This increased land spending combined with our efforts to increase the percentage of our lots control through options has allowed us to grow our active lot position to over 21,000 lawns.
Looking forward, we expect to again increase our spend on land acquisition and development in fiscal '22, which should generate at least 10% growth in our total lot position.
As you can see, on slide 12, we've already driven our total active lot positions back to a level that supported a much higher community count.
On slide 13, we've shown this data on an index basis.
In fiscal '21, the growth in our lot position was driven by the approval of more than 100 communities for acquisition.
Accordingly, we have very good visibility into a substantial lift in our community count, which will start later this year and accelerate during fiscal 23.
Fiscal 21 was a very successful year, but it's in the rearview mirror.
