Slide 5 lays out the key points we're going to cover today.
As you can see on Slide 7, we ended fiscal 2021 with a strong fourth quarter that was in line with our guidance.
As you know, our Q4 growth rates were impacted by the unprecedented demand we experienced in 2020 when at-home food consumption surged due to the onset of the pandemic and organic net sales increased 21.5%.
And as you can see, on a two-year CAGR basis, organic net sales for the fourth quarter increased by more than 4% and our two-year adjusted earnings per share grew by more than 22%.
In the chart on the left, on Slide 10, you can see the increase in household penetration across our portfolio during fiscal 2021, clear evidence of the magnitude of our new consumer acquisition.
As you can see on Slide 11, we delivered an impressive innovation slate in fiscal '21.
Slide 12 highlights a handful of our important launches in fiscal '21.
Slide 14 demonstrates how our ongoing investments in e-commerce have continued to yield results.
Growth in our $1 billion e-commerce business continued in fiscal 2021, both against our peers and as a percentage of our overall retail sales.
E-commerce sales now represent nearly 8% of our total retail sales.
Just take a look at Slide 15.
Total Conagra retail sales grew an impressive 11.7% on a two-year basis in the fourth quarter with contributions from each of our retail domains.
On a two-year basis, we delivered double-digit growth rates in retail sales across our frozen and snacking domains and a solid 5.2% growth rate in staples.
Let's dig into each domain a bit more, and let's start with frozen on Slide 16.
All in, our strategic frozen business grew 13.5% over the two-year period ending in fiscal 2021.
As you can see on Slide 17, consumer repeat rates for our leading frozen brands have been stronger than for the competition.
Turning to Slide 18.
Our snacks business has seen similar success, delivering strong two-year retail sales growth of 21% in fiscal '21, led by increases of more than 25% across hot cocoa, microwave popcorn, ready-to-eat pudding, and meat snacks.
On Slide 20, you can see the strength of our staples portfolio.
Staples retail sales increased 5.2% over the past two years, spurred by steady growth across key staples categories.
As you can see on Slide 21, the solid performance from staples was not isolated.
Slide 24 highlights some of the frozen products that will be rolled out during the year.
Our highly relevant staples portfolio is also receiving a new slate of innovation as shown on Slide 26.
This results in a CAGR over the three years ending fiscal '22 of approximately 3.5%, compared to our original target of 1% to 2%.
Adjusted operating margin is expected to be approximately 16%, and adjusted earnings per share is expected to be approximately $2.50.
I'll start with some highlights from the quarter and full-year fiscal '21, which are shown on Slide 30.
We delivered strong growth for the full fiscal year, including a 5.1% increase in organic net sales; adjusted operating profit of nearly $2 billion, up 7.4% versus fiscal '20; and operating margin of 17.5% for the year, an increase of more than 100 basis points versus fiscal '20; an adjusted EBITDA increase of 6.5%; and adjusted earnings per share growth of 15.8% for the year.
Turning to Slide 31.
Our 10.1% decrease in organic net sales during the quarter was driven by a 12.8% decline in volume due to the comparison to last year's demand surge.
The impact of the volume decline was partially offset by a 2.7% benefit from favorable mix and the initial pricing actions we took in response to the elevated inflationary environment, which I will describe in further detail shortly.
Divestitures drove a 150-basis-point decline to net sales for the quarter, and we faced an additional headwind of 560 basis points from the lapping of last year's 53rd week.
Finally, we experienced a 50 basis point benefit from foreign exchange during the quarter.
Combined, these factors drove a 16.7% decline in net sales for the quarter compared to a year ago.
The bottom half of the slide highlights the drivers of our net sales growth for full-year fiscal '21 versus the prior year with an increase in organic net sales of over 5% driven by volume growth and favorable price mix actions.
Slide 32 outlines our net sales summary by segment.
Slide 33 shows the puts and takes of our fourth-quarter adjusted gross margin and adjusted operating margin.
As you can see, our team did a great job pulling on our margin levers in the quarter, including taking price increases in several retail categories driving favorable mix throughout the portfolio, capturing $20 million of synergies associated with the Pinnacle Foods acquisition, managing our COVID-19-related costs, which were $36 million in the quarter and continuing to drive strong supply chain productivity.
COGS inflation continued to accelerate as the quarter progressed, ultimately landing at 8.6%, which was above the Q4 expectations we shared at the end of Q3.
We also increased our A&P by 27% in the quarter as we continue to identify opportunities for strong ROIs on these investments, particularly within e-commerce.
On Slide 34, we detail the operating profit and margin for our segments for the quarter and the full year.
As I noted earlier, our adjusted earnings per share of $0.54 was in line with our expectations despite higher-than-expected inflation.
The decline in adjusted operating profit and the impact of last year's 53rd week affected our results by $0.23 and $0.05, respectively, shown here on Slide 35.
Slide 36 summarizes our net debt at fiscal year end and EBITDA and cash flow performance for the fiscal year.
We ended the year with a net debt to EBITDA ratio of 3.6 times, which is in line with our fiscal '21 target.
During fiscal '21, we increased CAPEX by more than $130 million compared to the prior year and funded important capacity and productivity projects.
We also repurchased nearly $300 million worth of shares and paid $475 million in dividends in fiscal '21.
Given the timing of the closure, this sale had a minimal impact on our Q4 results, but we expect there to be an annualized net sales impact of roughly $40 million going forward.
We estimate that the sale will have a total annualized impact on our earnings per share of approximately $0.01.
We are therefore updating our guidance as shown on Slide 37.
For fiscal '22, we now expect organic net sales growth approximately flat to fiscal '21, adjusted operating margin of approximately 16%, and adjusted earnings per share of approximately $2.50.
Slide 38 shows the progression of our fiscal '22 inflation expectations, the continued acceleration being the biggest driver of the change in our guidance.
When we initially gave our fiscal '22 targets at our Investor Day in April of 2019, our models assumed an annual inflation rate of around 3%.
At the time of our third-quarter call in April of 2021, we expected fiscal '22 inflation to come in at twice that level around 6%.
We now currently expect fiscal '22 inflation to come in around 9%.
The difference between the 6% we expected a few months ago and the 9% we expect today equates to approximately $255 million in additional costs during fiscal '22.
For example, certain pricing actions can take 90 days to enact or a cost savings initiative may not be actionable until later in the year when a contract is up for review.
Slide 40 lays out the change in our adjusted earnings per share expectations in a bit more detail.
First, consistent with our prior divestitures, we are removing $0.01 for the Egg Beaters divestiture that we announced today.
Second, the largest driver of the change is the significant $0.41 per share increase in inflation since Q3 that I just discussed.
Slide 41 lays out some of the key assumptions that underlie our fiscal '22 expectations.
Turning to Slide 42.
I'm pleased that our strong balance sheet and our confidence in the long-term health and profitability of the business have put us in a position to raise our quarterly dividend to $0.3125 or $1.25 on an annualized basis beginning in September.
This new dividend level represents a 50% payout ratio based on our fiscal '22 earnings per share guidance, which is in line with our longer-term targets.
Before I close, I also want to provide some brief color on our tax asset in the disclosure you will see in our upcoming 10-K filing.
As some of you remember, when we sold our private label business in 2016, we incurred a tax capital loss of approximately $4 billion that we could apply as a carryforward to offset capital gains generated through fiscal year-end '21.
