The headline numbers for the quarter with earnings per share of $1.46 and ROTCE of 17.7% were flattered by a sizable reserve release.
We achieved 1% average loan growth in the quarter, a little less than projected as pay downs on PPP loans and across the back book in commercial offset generally good levels of originations.
We are now calling for further improvement in charge-offs to 20 basis points to 25 basis points in the third quarter and 25 basis points to 35 basis points for the full year.
We reported underlying net income of $656 million and earnings per share of $1.46.
Our underlying ROTCE for the quarter was 17.7%, which includes the impact of the sizable credit provision benefit.
Revenue of $1.6 billion was down slightly linked quarter on lower mortgage fee income with net interest income up slightly given interest earning asset growth.
Average loans were up 1% in the quarter on the strength of retail originations hitting an all-time high, giving us good momentum heading into the second half of the year.
Mortgage fees were lower as margins continue to tighten, although origination volumes remain quite strong and we continue to control expenses down 2% quarter-over-quarter.
We recorded a credit provision benefit of $213 million, which reflects sustained macroeconomic improvement and strong credit performance with lower charge-offs.
Our ACL ratio is now at 1.75% excluding PPP loans.
And finally, we are in a very strong capital position with CET1 at 10.3% after returning $168 million to shareholders in dividends during the quarter.
We also continue to grow our tangible book value per share, which was $33.95 at quarter end, up 6% compared with a year ago.
Net interest income on slide 6 was up 1% linked quarter, given interest earning asset growth and higher day count.
Average loans were up 1% and net interest margin was down slightly.
Interest-bearing deposit costs improved 4 basis points to 16 basis points from continued discipline on deposit pricing.
Our asset sensitivity increased to about 10.7% from 8.5% at the end of the first quarter.
Referring to slide 7, we delivered solid fee results again this quarter with record results in capital markets and wealth, reflecting the ongoing investments in our capabilities and the benefit of acquisitions.
Mortgage fees were down approximately $80 million this quarter as production revenue was impacted by continued pressure on gain on sale margins, particularly in the wholesale and corresponding channels, given increased industry capacity and competitive pressures.
While we have expected a meaningful decline in mortgage revenue for the quarter, it ended up greater than expected due to two items that reduced our revenue by a combined $24 million.
The first was the $14 million of MSR valuation losses net of hedges driven by changes in implied rate volatility which moved to unexpectedly near the end of the quarter.
Also, we were impacted by a $10 million increase in late quarter to mortgage agency fees retroactively applied to existing pipelines.
Secondary originations remain strong but were down about 10% from first quarter levels.
As expected, we are seeing a continuing shift toward purchase originations which increased from about 35% of the total in first quarter to about 48% in the second quarter.
Also, our third party servicing book grew to $85 billion, up 3% linked quarter and 6% year-over-year and servicing contribution improved $13 million linked quarter.
Capital market fees hit another high of 12% linked quarter with loan syndication fees hitting the highest level since 2017.
Additionally, while these had a new record, up 3% linked quarter, reflecting an increase in assets under management from net inflows with record sales and strong market levels.
Finally, card fees results were strong, up 16% linked quarter as debit transactions and credit card spend rebounded to exceed pre-pandemic levels given the strengthening recovery, which also benefited from seasonal trends.
On slide 8, expenses were well controlled, down 2% linked quarter with seasonality in salaries and employee benefits.
Average loans on slide 9 were up $643 million or 1% linked quarter given strength in our retail portfolio, offsetting a decline in commercial.
We saw average commitments for our middle market and mid corporate clients grew by 2% in the second quarter after being flat in the first quarter.
Overall spot loan growth for the quarter before the impact of PPP forgiveness was 1.8% given strong retail and commercial originations.
On slide 10 deposit flows continue to be robust especially in low cost categories and our liquidity ratios remain strong.
Average deposits were up 3% linked quarter and 6% year-over-year with strong growth in demand deposits.
We are very pleased with our continued progress on deposit repricing with total deposit costs down 3 basis points to 11 basis points.
Interest-bearing deposit costs were down 4 basis points to 16 basis points during the quarter and we expect these costs to continue decreasing to low teens or better by the end of the year.
Moving on to credit on slides 11 and 12, we saw excellent credit results this quarter.
Net charge-offs dropped by more than half as they declined from 52 basis points to 25 basis points linked quarter, driven by improvements across the portfolio.
Non-accrual loans decreased $229 million or 23% linked quarter with $116 million decrease in commercial reflecting repayments and charge-offs.
Retail non-accrual loans decreased by $113 million linked quarter driven by mortgage and home equity.
Given the improvement in outlook and performance of the portfolio, our reserves decreased ending the quarter at 1.75% excluding PPP loans compared with 2.03% at the end of the first quarter.
Moving to slide 13.
We maintained excellent balance sheet strength increasing our CET1 ratio from 10.1% in the first quarter to 10.3% at the end of the second quarter after returning $168 million in capital to shareholders through dividends in the quarter.
We paused our stock repurchases in the second quarter in anticipation of strong second half loan growth and the HSBC transaction which are expected closing in the first quarter of 2022, we use about 24 basis points of capital.
We have the opportunity to resume repurchases in the second half with about $660 million of capacity remaining under our current Board authorization.
The pace and magnitude of repurchases will consider the strength of organic growth as well as the potential for fee based acquisitions while managing CET1 to within our target range of 9.75% to 10%.
Before I move on to our second [Phonetic] quarter outlook, let me highlight some exciting things that are happening across the Company on slide 14, and I should have said as 3Q outlook, before I move on to that.
Therefore, consistent with international influence [Phonetic] we have set ambitious targets to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions from operations by 30% by 2025 and 50% by 2035.
There is a recap of the transaction on slide 15, so I won't rehash all the details, other than to reiterate the attractive entry this provides us in the important New York City Metro, Washington DC and South Florida markets.
In addition, the $7 billion net deposit position provides a significant long-term funding flexibility in support of our attractive loan growth opportunities.
And now for some high level commentary on the outlook on slide 17.
We expect NII to be up 2% to 3% with NIM up low to mid single digits with our outlook based on 10-year treasury rate expectation of 1.35% for the third quarter.
We expect average loans to be up slightly in the third quarter with spot loans up about 2% to 3%.
Fee income is expected to be up 2% to 4% reflecting improvement in mortgage banking results and other categories as the economic recovery continues, partially offset by seasonal impacts in capital markets.
We expect net charge-offs will be in the range of 20 basis points to 25 basis points of average loans with the provision less than net charge-offs.
With a substantial improvement in credit, we expect that net charge-offs will be in the range of 25 basis points to 35 basis points for the full year, down from our prior outlook of 35 basis points to 45 basis points.
