We had a successful and busy third quarter featuring continued strong execution of our strategic initiatives, good financial performance with positive operating leverage and 7% sequential PPNR growth, and the announcement of three acquisitions.
Our financial performance in Q3 reflects strong revenue growth of 3% sequentially as both net interest income and fees grew nicely.
NII benefited from a pickup in spot loan growth with retail up 3% and commercial up 1% excluding PPP impact from loan forgiveness.
We kept expenses under control given our efficiency initiatives, which led to positive sequential operating leverage of around 2.5%.
And credit continues to be in great shape, with NCOs of 14 basis points in the quarter, well below our guidance range for the quarter of 20 basis points to 25 basis points.
The investors of HSBC transactions give us a top 10 deposit market share in New York City Metro and over 1 million new customers who collectively we feel we can do more for.
We reported underlying net income of $546 million and earnings per share of $1.22.
Our underlying ROTCE for the quarter was 14.2%, which includes the impact of a modest credit provision benefit.
Revenue of $1.7 billion was up 3% linked quarter given growth in both fee income and net interest income.
Period end loans were up 1% in the quarter with strong originations in retail and commercial.
Loans were up 2% excluding PPP forgiveness giving us good momentum heading into the fourth quarter.
Fee highlights include strong results in capital markets, notwithstanding seasonality another strong quarter for wealth and a rebound in mortgage fees and we delivered positive sequential operating leverage of over 2% this quarter with well controlled expenses.
We recorded a credit provision benefit of $33 million, which reflects strong credit performance with lower charge-offs.
Our ACL ratio is now at 1.65% excluding PPP loans.
We are in a very strong capital position with CET1 at 10.3%, after returning $157 million to shareholders in dividends during the quarter.
And finally, we continue to grow our tangible book value per share, which was $34.44 at quarter end, up 7% compared with a year ago.
Net interest income on Slide 6 was up 2% linked quarter, given interest earning asset growth, stable net interest margin and higher day count.
The net interest margin was 2.72%, flat sequentially as the benefit of accelerated PPP forgiveness and improved funding costs were offset by the impact of higher cash balances as well as lower earning asset yields given low rates.
One highlight is our continued progress on lowering interest bearing deposit costs, which were down 2 basis points to 14 basis points.
Our asset sensitivity decreased to about 9.8% from 10.7% at the end of the second quarter.
The decrease primarily reflects loan and deposit mix changes and the addition of $2.5 billion in received-fixed swaps in the quarter.
So far in the fourth quarter, we have added another $1.25 billion.
Referring to Slide 7, we delivered solid fee results this quarter, demonstrating the strength and diversity of our fee income with strong results in capital markets and wealth.
Mortgage fees rebounded in the quarter, up $23 million as production fees benefited from lower agency fees and we saw improvement in MSR hedge results.
Diving further into this performance, production revenue was up $12 million linked quarter, benefiting from a modest improvement in gain on sale margins across channels given improved agency pricing and favorable execution.
This was partially offset by a decline in adjusted lock volumes, down sequentially about 10% which is broadly in line with industry level trends.
As expected we continue to see a shift toward purchase originations, which increased from about 48% in total -- of the total in second quarter to about 54% in the third quarter.
The contribution from servicing operations decreased $4 million linked quarter, reflecting higher MSR amortization.
Our third party servicing book grew to $87 billion, up 3% linked quarter and 8% year over year.
Lastly, our MSR hedging results improved $15 million linked quarter given an unusually large negative results in Q2.
On Slide 8, expenses were well-controlled, up 1% linked quarter as good expense discipline and the benefit of efficiency initiatives largely offset higher operational and travel costs.
Period-end loans on Slide 9 were up 1% linked quarter or 2% excluding PPP.
Retail loans were growing up 3% and commercial loans were up 1% excluding PPP in a tough operating environment.
Average loans were down 1%, but still up 1% excluding PPP.
Commercial is seeing strong underlying activity with spot loans up 1% in the quarter excluding PPP.
Line utilization levels were up around 50 basis points, still near historic lows.
In addition, our period end commitments are up around 2%, which will benefit us down the road once investment picks up.
Overall spot loan growth of 2% for the quarter ex-PPP provides good underlying momentum for loan growth in the fourth quarter.
On Slide 10, deposit flows continue to be robust especially in low-cost categories and our liquidity ratios remained strong.
Average deposits were up 1% linked quarter and 7% year-over-year with strong demand in demand deposits, which now make up 32% of total deposits.
We continued to make good progress on deposit repricing with total deposit costs down 2 basis points to 9 basis points.
Interest-bearing deposit costs were down 2 basis points to 14 basis points during the quarter with opportunity to reduce further.
Moving onto credit on Slide 11 and 12, we saw excellent credit results this quarter.
Net charge-offs dropped from 25 basis points to 14 basis points for the third quarter, driven by improvements across the portfolio.
Non-accrual loans decreased 4% linked quarter.
Given the improving outlook and strong performance of the portfolio, our reserves decreased ending the quarter at 1.65% ex-PPP compared with 1.7% at the end of the second quarter.
Moving to Slide 13, we maintained excellent balance sheet strength.
Our CET1 ratio remained stable at 10.3% at the end of the third quarter, after returning $167 million in capital to shareholders through dividends in the quarter.
After the vote, we have the opportunity to resume repurchases with $655 million of capacity remaining under our current Board authorization.
Before I move on to our 4Q outlook, let me highlight some exciting things that are happening across the company on Slide 14.
You can see some of the year-over-year stats on Slide 15.
Digital booked sales, for example, are up 24%.
Mobile active users are up 20%, and the number of Zelle transactions were up 34%.
Moving to Slide 16, as part of our ongoing efforts to help customers better navigate their financial lives, we recently announced several initiatives designed to make banking more transparent and accessible, including a new way to avoid overdraft fees and a commitment to helping ensure that under-served communities have access to banking services.
The benefits of these changes are shown on the right side of Slide 16.
And now for some high level commentary on the outlook on Slide 17.
NII is expected to be up around 2% in the fourth quarter ex-PPP impacts.
Most importantly, we are well-positioned to see overall loan growth accelerate in the fourth quarter with average loans up 1.5% to 2% or 2.5% to 3% ex-PPP.
And spot loan growth up around 3% or around 4% ex-PPP.
To wrap up on Slide 18, this was a strong quarter for Citizens with good momentum heading into the end of the year.
