We continue to focus on taking good care of customers, highlighted by $1.8 billion of PPP loans in the latest round of the program.
We delivered underlying Q1 earnings per share of $1.41 and ROTCE of 17.6%, while our CET1 ratio grew to 10.1% and our liquidity remains elevated with an 81% quarter-end loan-to-deposit ratio.
With a negative provision of $140 million in the first quarter, our ACL ratio ex-PPP loans is now 2.03%.
This compares with our day one ACL upon CECL adoption of 1.47%.
We've moved our charge-off guidance for full year 2021 to 35 to 45 basis points from the initial guidance of 50 to 65 basis points.
We reported underlying net income of $626 million and earnings per share of $1.41.
Our underlying ROTCE for the quarter was 17.6%, which includes the impact of a sizable reserve release.
Revenue of $1.7 billion was broadly stable year-over-year, strong fee income offsetting the impact of the low rate environment on NII.
We've recorded a negative provision for credit losses of $140 million, which reflects strong credit performance with lower charge-offs and improving loan portfolio profile and an improving macroeconomic outlook with our ACL ratio now at 2% excluding PPP loans.
And finally, we are in a very strong capital position with CET1 at 10.1% after returning $262 million to shareholders in dividends and share repurchases during the quarter.
We also continued to grow our tangible book value per share, which was $32.79 at quarter-end, up 3% compared with a year ago.
Net interest income on Slide 6 was down 1% linked-quarter given lower day count.
Interest-bearing deposit costs are down 7 basis points to 20 basis points, which more than offset the impact of lower asset yields.
We added $7 billion of five year receive-fixed cash flow swaps and terminated some pay-fixed swaps during the course of the quarter.
Those actions combined with expected balance sheet changes, reduced our asset sensitivity to about 8.5% from 10.8% at the end of the year.
Referring to Slide 7, we delivered solid fee results again this quarter, reflecting our ongoing efforts to invest in and diversify our revenue streams.
As expected, mortgage fees were down approximately 15% this quarter despite strong volumes as heightened competition and increased industry capacity pressured gain on sale margins.
Wealth fees were a record, up 12% linked-quarter, reflecting an increase in AUM from net inflows and strong market levels with record sales.
Capital markets fees remained robust, though they were down 8% from a record level in the fourth quarter with lower M&A advisory fees, partly offset by increased underwriting revenue.
Foreign exchange and interest rate products revenue decreased $7 million linked-quarter given reduced client hedging as a result of less lending activity and lower volatility.
Expenses on Slide 8 were well controlled, up 3% linked-quarter, driven by seasonality in salaries and employee benefits.
And we are on track to deliver total pre-tax run rate benefit of $400 million to $425 million by the end of 2021.
Average loans on Slide 9 were broadly stable linked-quarter as commercial pay-offs and slightly lower line utilization of about 32% compared with the historical average of roughly 37% was partially offset by growth in our education, mortgage and point-of-sale finance portfolios.
Looking at year-over-year trends, average loans were up approximately 1% due to PPP, education and mortgage.
We executed the PPP lending program very smoothly with $1.8 billion of loans secured as part of Round 2, taking the total PPP loans to $5.1 billion at period end.
We expect that about 85% of the Round 1 loans will be forgiven by the end of the year.
And for Round 2, which are five year loans, about 20% could be forgiven by the end of '21 and about 70% forgiven after two years.
On Slide 10, deposit flows benefited from the recent consumer-oriented stimulus, especially in low cost categories and our liquidity ratios remained strong.
Average deposits were up 1% linked-quarter and 16% year-over-year as consumers and small businesses benefited from government stimulus and commercial clients build liquidity.
We are very pleased with our progress on deposit repricing with total deposit costs down 5 basis points to 14 basis points and interest-bearing deposit costs down 7 basis points to 20 basis points during the quarter.
We continue to drive a shift toward lower cost categories with DDA now about 30% of average deposits compared with only 23% a year ago.
At the end of the last low rate cycle in 2015, our interest-bearing deposit costs bottomed at about 34 basis points.
This cycle, we are already at 20 basis points, and we expect these costs to decrease to the low-teens by the end of the year as we execute our deposit playbook.
Moving on to credit on Slides 11 and 12.
Net charge-offs were down 9 basis points to 52 basis points linked-quarter.
Non-accrual loans decreased $11 million linked-quarter with a $76 million increase in commercial driven by charge-offs, loan sales activity and repayments.
Retail non-accrual loans increased by $65 million linked-quarter driven by mortgage loans coming off forbearance.
In addition, our commercial criticized loans continued to trend down this quarter, decreasing by $495 million or 11%.
Given the improvement in the macroeconomic outlook and performance of the portfolio, our reserves decreased, but remained robust, ending the quarter at 2.03% excluding PPP loans compared with 2.24% at the end of the fourth quarter.
This is still significantly higher than our 1.47% day one CECL implementation coverage.
One on Slide 22 covering commercial credit.
As we continue to see improvements in the operating environment, these areas of concern have now decreased to 2.3% of the total CFG loan portfolio, down from 4.6% in 4Q '20 and approximately 11% in 1Q '20.
And accordingly, we are maintaining prudent reserve allocations with a reserve coverage of about 10% for these areas.
We maintained excellent balance sheet strength, as shown on Slide 13, increasing our CET1 ratio from 10% in 4Q to 10.1% at the end of the first quarter, which is slightly above our target operating range after returning $262 million in capital to shareholders in the quarter.
Before I move on to our 2Q outlook, let me highlight some exciting things that are happening across the company on Slide 14.
On the left side of the page, we were very pleased to be able to provide about $1.8 billion in new PPP loans through the latest SBA program, providing critical funding to over 30,000 of our small business customers.
We are continuing to add new merchants to our point-of-sale platform, such as BJ's Wholesale Club with more in the pipeline and the portfolio is up 8% year-over-year.
In addition, we continue to make great strides in our digital transformation with our digital sales up 48% year-over-year.
We launched our new mobile app on iOS in January, which is receiving great reviews with an average of 4.6 stars in the App Store.
And now for some high level commentary on the outlook for the second quarter on Slide 15.
We expect NII to be up 2% to 2.5% with NIM up modestly, more broadly stable excluding elevated cash.
We expect loan growth of 1.5% to 2% in the second quarter followed by an acceleration in the back of the year.
We expect net charge-offs will be in the range of 30 to 40 basis points of average loans with a meaningful reserve release through provision.
We have included some additional detail on the mortgage landscape in the appendix on Slide 20.
Given the strong performance of the loan portfolio and improvement in the macroeconomic forecast, we are reducing our full year charge-off guidance range to 35 to 45 basis points.
And with this improvement, we could also see our ACL ratio decline meaningfully from the current 2.3% -- 2.03% ex-PPP.
