This being said, our Q2 record numbers: revenue of 5 billion; net income of 795 million; and adjusted EBITDA of 1.4 billion, should not be our all-time records for long.
Drilling down specifically on our adjusted EBITDA, the 1.4 billion performance represented a 165% increase over the past quarter, primarily due to increased steel pricing fixed-price contract improvements, favorable product mix, and higher volumes.
In the Steelmaking segment, we sold 4.2 million net tons of steel products, which included 33% hot-rolled, 17% cold rolled, and 30% coated, with the remaining 20% consisting of stainless, electrical, plate, slab, and rail.
Direct automotive shipments were about 1.2 million tons during the quarter, about 300,000 tons less than what we anticipated back in March.
This contributed to an inventory build of about $300 million during Q2, which, along with rising receivables due to rising prices, produced another working capital build during the second quarter.
We expect to generate 1.4 billion in cash from our expected 1.8 billion in adjusted EBITDA for the third quarter.
Furthermore, we are increasing our full-year adjusted EBITDA guidance to $5.5 billion.
In the second quarter, we made open market bond repurchases and completely redeemed the remaining 400 million of our 2025 unsecured notes, the only bond we had that was callable this year.
And we have already repaid another 455 million in debt during just the first 20 days of July.
Our revenue line increased by $1 billion and our cost of goods sold increased by just $100 million.
earlier this month, we instituted a companywide vaccination bonus program that offers a cash bonus of $1,500 to each vaccinated employee if the level of vaccination of their working sites achieved 75%.
If the level of vaccination of the site achieves 85%, the cash bonus paid to each employee of the site doubles to $3,000.
And some of the locations are already at the first threshold, with two locations already at a second threshold of 85%.
7 is the largest blast furnace in North America, and for reference, produced 33% more hot metal per day than our two blast furnaces at Cleveland works combined.
And thus far in July, we are producing at a 2.1 million tons annualized rate, well above nameplate of 1.9 million tons per year.
Along with the productivity benefits, this action alone reduced our implied carbon emissions by 163,000 tons during the quarter.
Natural gas composition is 95% CH4, methane, and 4% C2H6, ethane.
Also, our direct reduction plant uses 100% of natural gas as a reduction.
The total amount of natural gas, we currently use in our eight blast furnaces and in our direct reduction plant eliminates the need for 1.5 million tons of coke per year, the equivalent of two coke batteries.
Actually, our direct reduction plant was designed and built to be able to use up to 70% hydrogen.
In reality, even here in the United States, soon to achieve 75 participation of EAFs, we may be near a peak, particularly in further investments in direct reduction are not made.
