We expect to file our Form 10-Q and post it on our website on or before November 6th.
When I look back at what we've accomplished over the past 10 months, I'm extremely proud of our associates, agents and leadership team.
CNO has a unique set of capabilities in our 5,000-agent strong exclusive distribution force and our top five direct-to-consumer business.
Turning to Slide 4.
Operating earnings were up 63% and operating earnings per share were up 76%.
Even excluding these and other factors, which we believe are largely temporary, our insurance product margin remained strong, up $3 million or 1%.
We ended the quarter with an RBC ratio of 428% and $236 million in cash at the holding company.
These levels are after returning $67 million to shareholders, including $50 million in stock buybacks.
Turning to our growth scorecard on Slide 5.
Life sales were up at solid 19% fueled by both continued strong direct-to-consumer growth and exclusive field agent sales.
Health sales showed significant sequential improvement, but remained down 16% over the prior year.
Insurance collected premium growth accelerated to 3.3% driven by continued strong persistency and cumulative sales growth over the past year in life and health.
Turning to our Consumer Division on Slide 6.
Life insurance sales were up 25% for the quarter and up 19% year-to-date.
Direct-to-consumer life sales were up 23% which comprised just over half of our total life sales.
Life sales generated by our exclusive field agents were up 29%, the highest growth rate we've experienced in several years.
During this year's Medicare annual enrollment period, consumers can purchase Medicare products from us online or from one of our 2,800 telesales and local exclusive field agents who are certified to sell Medicare plans.
During the second quarter at the height of the pandemic our producing agent count was down as much as 26%.
It has since rebounded nicely up 9% sequentially driven by higher retention and an uptick in new agent recruiting.
Turning to Slide 7 and our Worksite Division.
We saw a significant sequential improvement in our worksite sales in the third quarter with sales up 48% over the second quarter.
Relative to the year-ago period, however, sales were down 56%.
These virtual programs drove almost 30% of our sales in the quarter.
Turning to Slide 8.
We returned $67 million to shareholders in the third quarter, including $50 million in share buybacks.
Year-to-date we have deployed $163 million on buybacks.
Turning to the financial highlights on Slide 9.
As Gary mentioned, operating earnings per share were up 76% benefiting from favorable health margin due to customer deferral of care, strong net investment income and strict expense control.
Earnings were also favorably impacted by our continued strong free cash flow funding share repurchases that reduced our share count by 9% year-over-year.
Allocated and unallocated expenses decreased by 4% in the aggregate, driven by general expense discipline as well as decreased travel and marketing related expenses.
Fee income declined by $2.2 million compared to the prior-year quarter, driven by $3.3 million of expenses related to our myHealthPolicy.com online marketing initiative.
Operating return on equity, excluding significant items, was 11.9% through September 30, 2020, which compares to 10.6% in the prior-year period both on a trailing 12-month basis.
Turning to Slide 10 and our product level results.
Our margin in the third quarter included a net favorable impact of $42 million related to COVID.
The annuity margin reflects an unfavorable impact of approximately $7 million from higher persistency related to COVID.
The health margin included approximately $58 million of favorable impacts related to COVID driven by the release of prior period claim reserve redundancies due to claim levels continuing to trend below pre-COVID levels.
And our life margin in the third quarter included approximately $9 million of unfavorable impacts related to COVID.
Insurance product margin, excluding all COVID impacts, was up $3 million or 1%, which reflects the strength of our underlying business and the benefits from our diverse product suite.
Turning to Slide 11 and our investment results.
Investment income allocated to products was essentially flat as the impact of the 4% increase in net insurance liabilities and related investments was largely offset by an 18 basis point year-over-year decline in the average yield on those investments to 4.88%.
Sequentially, the average yield declined 4 basis points consistent with our prior guidance.
Investment income not allocated to products increased $9 million year-over-year to $43.7 million, driven by strong alternative investment performance.
Our new money rate of 4.08% was down 58 basis points year-over-year and down 41 basis points sequentially.
This reflects $582 million in funds invested in assets with an average rating of A- and an average duration of 12 years.
Turning to Slide 12 and an overview of our investment portfolio.
At quarter-end, our invested assets were $26 billion, up 6% year-over-year.
As you can see from the slide, approximately 96% of our fixed maturity portfolio is investment grade with an average rating of A. The BBB allocation comprised 41% of our investment grade holdings, consistent with the prior quarter.
Turning to Slide 13.
We continued to generate strong free cash flow to the holding company in the third quarter with excess cash flow of $95 million or 84% of operating income this quarter and $280 million or 79% of operating income on a trailing 12-month basis.
As Gary mentioned, we returned $67 million to shareholders in the quarter, including dividends of $17 million and share repurchases of $50 million.
Turning to Slide 14.
At quarter-end, our consolidated RBC ratio was 428%, up from 405% at June 30th, reflecting the very strong operating results in the quarter.
This represented approximately $140 million excess capital relative to the high end of our targeted range of 375% to 400%.
Our Holdco liquidity at quarter-end was $236 million, which represents $86 million of excess capital relative to our target minimum Holdco liquidity of $150 million.
Turning to Slide 15 and our outlook for the remainder of the year.
As additional data points through the third week in October, first, direct-to-consumer sales were up 3%.
Second, consumer life and health sales in total were up 20%.
Third, annuity collected premiums were up 9%.
And fourth worksite life and health sales in total were down 47%.
We have revised our estimated COVID mortality impact across all of our products, both life and health to $68,000 per 1,000 US deaths down from $130,000 per 1,000 US deaths in our prior forecast.
When we announced our strategic transformation in January, we could not have predicted what would follow over the subsequent 10 months.
