Organic net sales were down 4% for the quarter, driven by the expected lapping of prior year retailer inventory replenishment, as well as constrained supply in the current quarter.
We were however, up 5% versus fiscal 2020 and consumption was, up 2% versus prior year and up 9% versus two years ago, signaling strong persistent consumer demand.
This dynamic resulted in a 6 point difference in net sales versus consumption in measured channels, a relationship we do not expect to continue through the remainder of the year.
Our ingredient and packaging spend, we are now over 85% covered, thereby reducing the variability in the upcoming quarters, while we continue to deliver on our supply chain productivity improvements and our cost savings initiatives.
Organic net sales were down 6% versus prior year, lapping 11% growth in the prior year and up 5% versus fiscal 2020.
Consumption though flat year-over-year was, up 9% versus two years ago, reflecting the strength of demand for our products.
Turning to Soup on Slide 10, our Win in Soup strategy continues to show positive results.
US Soup consumption grew 2% over elevated levels in the prior year.
Bringing growth versus two years ago to 9%.
Ready-to-serve increased share in the quarter, including over 3 points of share gains among millennials.
Within ready-to-serve Chunky had a very strong quarter, increasing consumption 8% on top of 2% growth in the prior year quarter and grew share by 0.6 points versus prior year.
On Swanson broth, we also grew share by 1.6 points, representing the third consecutive quarter of growth as supply recovery continued.
Turning to Sauces, Prego remain the number one share leader for 30 straight months.
The percentage of buyers under the age of 35 has increased versus the prior year quarter on nearly all key brands.
Specifically on US Soup, the percentage of buyers under 35 increased almost 2 points this quarter and the average age of Campbell Soup consumers are getting younger.
Organic net sales were, down 1%, primarily due to labor-related supply constraints, but grew 4%, compared to fiscal 2020, in-market performance was strong growing 5% over the prior year quarter and 9% on a two-year basis.
Our power brands continue to fuel performance with in-market consumption growth of 6% this fiscal year and 13% on a two-year basis, driven by double-digit consumption growth across the majority of our brands.
We also continue to increase the relevance additional [Phonetic] kids audience with 60% of new buyers being households with our kids.
We continued to drive share growth on other brands as well, including Snack Factory pretzel crisps by 2.5 points, Kettle Brand potato chips by more than a point and Cape Cod potato chips 2.6 points.
Turning to Slide 17, as Rebecca mentioned at the start of the call from this quarter onwards we will exclude from adjusted net earnings, unrealized mark-to-market gains and losses on outstanding undesignated commodity hedges, until such time that the related exposure impacts operating results.
For the first quarter as we left 8% growth in the prior-year, organic net sales declined 4%, due to the anticipated cycling of year ago retailer inventory recovery and supply pressures.
As Mark highlighted earlier consumer demand remains strong in [Technical Issues] basis were 5% higher, compared to two years ago or the first fiscal quarter of 2020.
Adjusted EBIT decreased 15%, compared to prior year, it was 1% higher on the two-year basis, despite the significant levels of inflation on ingredients, packaging, labor, warehousing and logistics.
Our adjusted EBIT margin was 17.4%, compared to 19.5% in the prior year and slightly down from fiscal 2020.
Adjusted earnings per share from continuing operations decreased $0.12 or 12% versus prior year to $0.89 per share, but remains well ahead of fiscal 2020.
Organic net sales decreased 4% during the quarter, driven by a 6 point volume headwind, which reflects lapping of the prior year retailer inventory recovery and the before mentioned supply constraints.
Favorable price and sales allowances drove a 4 point gain in the quarter, which was partially offset by a 2 point headwind due to some spend back on promotional spending in the quarter closer to pre-pandemic levels.
The impact of the sale of Plum subtracted 1 point.
All in our reported net sales declined 4% from the prior year.
Turning to Slide 19.
Our first quarter adjusted gross margin decreased by 200 basis points from 34.5% last year to 32.5% this year.
Mix had a negative impact of approximately 70 basis points on gross margin as we cycled last year's retail inventory recovery and favorable operating leverage.
Net price realization drove a 190 basis point improvement, due to the benefits of our recent pricing actions, partially offset by increased promotional spending.
Inflation and other factors had a negative impact of 470 basis points with the majority of the decline driven by cost inflation as overall input prices on a rate basis increased by approximately 6%.
That said, our ongoing supply chain productivity program contributed 120 basis points to gross margin, partially offsetting these inflationary headwinds.
Our cost savings program, which is incremental to our ongoing supply chain productivity program added 30 basis points to our gross margin.
As you saw on the previous page, the progress we made in the first quarter to mitigate these inflationary pressures reduced the impact to 130 basis points on our adjusted gross margin.
We have achieved $15 million in incremental year-over-year savings and remain on track to deliver our cumulative savings target of $850 million by the end of fiscal year.
We are working toward expanding our plan to $1 billion and we'll share more details next week at our Investor Day.
Marketing and selling expenses decreased $38 million or 18% in the quarter on a year-over-year basis.
Although, A&C declined 31% as investment was moderated to reflect supply pressure, we expect it to normalize as supply strengthened throughout the year.
Overall, our marketing and selling expenses represented 7.6% of net sales during the quarter and 130 basis point decrease, compared to last year.
Adjusted administrative expenses increased $17 million or 12% largely, due to expenses related to the settlement of certain legal claims as higher general administrative costs were largely offset by the benefits of cost savings initiatives.
Adjusted administrative expenses represented 6.9% of net sales [Technical Issues] to summarize the key drivers of performance this quarter.
As previously mentioned adjusted EBIT decline 15% as the net sales declined and the 200 basis points gross margin contraction, resulted in a $36 million and $44 million EBIT headwinds respectively, partially offsetting this was lower marketing and selling expenses, contributing 130 basis points to our adjusted EBIT margin.
Higher adjusted administrative and R&D expenses had a negative impact of 110 basis points and lower adjusted other income had a 30 basis point impact.
Overall, our adjusted EBIT margin decreased year-over-year by 210 basis points to 17.4%.
The following chart breaks down our adjusted earnings per share change between our operating performance and below the line items, a $0.17 impact of lower adjusted EBIT was partially offset by a $0.02 favorable impact from lower interest expense and a $0.04 impact of lower adjusted taxes, due to the favorable resolution of several tax matters in the quarter.
This resulted in better-than-expected adjusted earnings per share of $0.89, which was down $0.25 per share, compared to the prior year.
Turning to the segments, in Meals & Beverages organic net sales decreased 6%, as favorable price and sales allowances in the quarter were more than offset by volume declines across US retail products, including V8 beverages, Prego pasta sauces and US Soup, as well as in Canada.
Sales of US Soup decreased 2%, cycling 21% increase in the prior year quarter.
Operating earnings for Meals & Beverages decreased 17% to $280 million, the decrease was primarily due to a lower gross margin and sales volume declines, partially offset by lower marketing selling expenses.
Overall, within our Meals & Beverage division, the first quarter operating margin decreased year-over-year by 260 basis points to 22.1%.
Within Snacks, organic net sales decreased 1% to $1 billion, as favorable price and sales allowances were more than offset by volume declines and increased promotional spending, compared to moderated levels in the prior year quarter.
Sales of power brands increased 30%.
Operating earnings for Snacks decreased 5% for the quarter, driven by increased administrative expenses, due to the settlement of certain legal claims and a slightly lower gross margin, partially offset by lower marketing and selling expenses.
Overall within our Snacks division first quarter operating margin decreased year-over-year by 60 basis points to 13.2%.
Fiscal 2022 cash flow from operations increased from $180 million in the prior year to $288 million, primarily due to lower working capital related to outflows mostly from accounts payable and accrued liabilities, partially offset by lower cash earnings.
Our year-to-date cash outflows for investing activities were reflective of the cash outlay for capital expenditures of $69 million, which was comparable to prior year.
In light of the current operating environment, we are reducing our planned full-year capital expenditures from $330 million to approximately $300 million for fiscal 2022.
Our year-to-date cash outflows for financing activities were $220 million, the vast majority of which are $179 million, represented the return of capital to our shareholders, including a $160 million of dividends paid and $63 million of share repurchases during the quarter.
At the end of the first quarter we had approximately $475 million remaining under the current $500 million strategic share repurchase program.
We also have $250 million anti-dilutive share repurchase program, of which approximately $176 million is remain.
We ended the first quarter with cash and cash equivalents of $69 million.
Turning to Slide 28, as covered earlier, adjusted net earnings now excludes unrealized mark-to-market gains and losses on outstanding underestimated commodity hedges and the guidance for adjusted EBIT and adjusted earnings per share growth rates reflect this change.
For the full-year, we expect organic net sales to be minus 1% to plus 1%.
Adjusted EBIT of minus 4.5% to minus 1.5% and adjusted earnings per share of minus 4% to flat versus the adjusted fiscal 2021 results.
The sale of Plum is estimated to have an impact of 1 percentage point of fiscal 2022 net sales.
