Kevin has over 15 years of industry experience in the energy sector, working most recently in investor relations and previously as a research analyst covering the [Inaudible] industry.
For the quarter, total production came in at over a 112,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day.
Overall, Callon's operating performance combined with our disciplined capital spending program that was below budget for the year, drove free cash flow generation to a new record of approximately $125 million for the quarter.
Early in 2021, we outlined a capital allocation framework reinvestment rates of 65% to 75% of our operating cash flow at planning process.
In 2021, challenge actual capex ultimately represented less than 60% of our operating cash flow as commodity prices prove to be higher than our planning prices while our capital plan remained unchanged, setting the stage for excess free cash flow to flow directly debt reduction.
This cash flow profile was a clear product of our operating profit margin that grew by roughly 141% year-over-year and remains top tier in the industry.
Our free cash flow generation, combined with our asset monetization and liability management initiatives, contributed to $760 million of absolute debt reduction.
It resulted in a net debt to adjusted ratio of 2 times on a fourth quarter annualized basis.
As you may recall, last spring, we renounced meaningful goals to reduce flaring and GHG emissions by 2025.
Given our progress in reducing flaring in 2021, paired with increased methane emissions initiatives that are in process that accelerate our goal timeline by one year to 2024 increased our GHG reduction target to at least 50%.
As part of raising that bar relative to our original GHG goals, we also expect to reduce our methane intensity to less than 0.2% by 2024.
Reduce total flaring to below 1%  by 2024, and eliminate all routine flaring this year.
But I also want to highlight our substantial true reserve base, 485 million barrels of oil equivalent at year-end, comprised of 60% oil and 85% Permian volumes.
Importantly, we increase PDP volumes by almost 30% in 2021, and PDP now represents 57% of total proved reserves.
In addition to add improved volumes at an attractive valuation through acquisition, we replaced over 100% for 2021 production through the drill bit at a PDP FND cost of approximately $8 per BOE.
The total our SEC PV-10 valuation increased by nearly $5 billion as we exited the year with an SEC PV-10 value $7.1 billion.
For 2022, we have set a capital budget of $725 million, which represents an operating cash flow reinvestment rate approximately 60%, $75 per barrel WTI is expected to generate free cash flow well over $500 million using that oil price assumption.
That recent strip pricing levels imply reinvestment rate would decline to approximately 52% and free cash flow an increase of nearly $700 million.
Our capital allocation to the Permian will increase to 85% this year, as we advance our scale development model across a recently expanded opportunity set of over 135,000 acres in the basin.
As a result, we are forecasting cost inflation gradually completion and equipment costs in the range of 10%, driven primarily by labor, steel, and fuel costs.
We are also budgeting approximately $20 million for environmental projects and initiatives, which are being accelerated this year to achieve the new goals ambitions that I discussed earlier.
Looking at our 2022 production profile, we expect a production reset in the first quarter of 2022 as our production levels are impacted by fourth quarter divestitures of approximately 3,000 BOE per day, and a shift to a larger scale development model on the newly acquired properties, which will impact the timing of wells place on production.
Our POPs will rebound to over 30 net well in the second quarter of this year in conjunction with an expansion in our duct inventory to over 45 wells in the first half.
Note that shift in production timing will not compromise a sustained level strong free cash flow generation with the forecast of over $125 million in the first quarter.
With this positioning for more efficient scale development across a larger portion of our asset base, we expect to deliver 10% growth in our oil volumes during the course of the year, and an average annual total production rate for the year in line with 2021 became an approximately 105,000 BOE per day after adjusting for acquisition divestiture activity during the year.
With free cash flow potential, and excess of 10% of enterprise value at recent strip pricing, we see a clear path to adding shareholder value as enterprise values transferred from debt balances to equity value.
Callon's value proposition has a strong foundation inventory of 15 years of locations of $50 per barrel WTI and below with additional upside, I'm going to [Inaudible] from a multi zone resource base.
As Joe pointed out, the operating environment over the last 12 months has presented many challenges, and I'm proud to say that our team was up for them.
I cannot overstate how important the 29 well Urban West project that came online during the second quarter played in our production results for the year.
During the year, we collected 5 full fields to the power grids, and this allowed us to take 43 generators from service, which not only reduces our carbon footprint, but also results in over $2 billion in annual savings.
This year, a plan is to continue expanding the field electrification across the Eagle Ford assets to release an additional 30 more diesel generators.
Also will be replacing over 60% of the pneumatic devices with instrument air to help us move closer to our overall methane reduction targets.
During the fourth quarter, we completed an eight well 3 zone development in the Wolfcamp A, Wolfcamp B, in lower Sprayberry formations, bringing on two of those wells at the end of '21 and the other six and early January.
To drilling days for the eight wells, which had an average lateral length of roughly 11000 feet, averaged about ten days from spud to rig release, which represents a reduction of 10% versus our average drilling time.
Moving to the Delaware, we were very active during the fourth quarter, bringing online 16 wells, 3 of the wells, which I'll discuss later, were from our newly acquired Delaware South properties, so Primexx has become Delaware South.
2 Ward County wells that we brought online that I would like to highlight are the cohort wells that we completed in the third bones springs formation, so a modestly nontraditional formation.
These 5,000-foot barrel wells had an average 30-day IP rate of over 180045 BOE per day, of which 85% was oil.
So again, short 5,000-foot laterals, making a significant amount of production.
Our ESP management program is top tier and has resulted in an 80% improvement in runtime since 2018.
We completed the acquisition in October 1st, and within hours of closing, we had a crew onsite drilling out frac bugs and the 3 wells that were drilled and completed by Primexx.
Our team successfully brought the three wells online within seven days of closing, these wells have been producing for roughly 90 days plus, and have oil cuts similar to our Delaware East assets and are performing in line with expectations.
In total, we've allocated approximately 85% of our DNC budget to target the Permian.
Just like our peers, we are experiencing cost inflation with average well costs between 8% and maybe 12%.
We set a new record for EBITDA, we've seen approximately $1 billion in adjusted EBITDA for the year.
We delivered on our divestiture targets and realized $210 million more adjustments.
Remarkable achievement ended the year with the pro forma leverage ratio of 2.3 times.
With regard to this, 2.3 times, this is a pro forma calculation on leverage, which follows the closing of the Primexx acquisition October 1st.
We realized an increase in operating margins as the high oil weighting of our asset base was lower gathering transportation and processing on a per unit production basis led to an 8% sequential increase in our quarterly operating margin to approximately $49 per BOE.
This top tier margin helped us realize adjusted EBITDA of $339 million in the fourth quarter,16% increase over our third quarter results.
During the fourth quarter of Callon, generated an adjusted free cash flow for approximately $124 million.
For the full year, we generated roughly $274 million of free cash flow.
During 2021, we reduced our debt balance by $290 million and lowered our RBO borrowing level to below 50%.
You consider the $470 million in cash we borrowed for the Primexx acquisition, it is really $760 million of pro forma debt reduction over the course of the year.
Since year-end 2019, we have paid down roughly $500 million of debt.
We are not done here, either, based on our initial 2022 guidance and consensus estimates, we expect to generate approximately $500 million of free cash flow in 2022 at least flat $75 oil price.
This quantum of cash flow puts us in a position to achieve absolute debt levels approaching $2 billion and a leverage ratio 1.5 times by year-end.
You could see from the latest slides we've began to add 2023 of oil hedges that protect the floor of $70.
