The consistent execution of lowering our capital and operating costs and delivering repeatable well results in the Delaware over the last three years makes this a logical addition to our core Delaware footprint, and we anticipate delivering similar performance and synergies across the expanded position of over 110,000 net acres.
In addition to the strategic merits, we will realize substantial financial benefits through a more robust free cash flow outlook and lower capital reinvestment rates that will complement the day one deleveraging impact of the acquisition from the addition of almost 20,000 BOE per day of production in the equity component of the consideration paid.
Along with the acquisition of the Primexx assets, we have agreed with Kimmeridge Energy for the exchange of approximately $200 million over 9% second lien senior notes into common shares, which will occur after the closing of the Primexx transaction.
This will require shareholder approval to issue incremental shares to a party that currently owns over 5% of our shares, and we've already secured approximately 30% of the majority of vote required.
A relatively high level of completion activity throughout the second quarter has us off to a great start in July, with volumes increasing nearly 10% from June and our oil cut climbing as well.
We are planning to run approximately 3.5 rigs on our legacy acreage in the second half of the year as we position operations for a strong hand-off into 2022.
With two full-time crews, an e-frac pad and one other spot crew, we were able to complete and turn to production 47 new wells.
From the third quarter of 2019 until now, we've seen an almost 70% improvement in footage per day.
Those gains, along with an improved pricing environment, have lowered the cost per lateral foot more than 50%.
And importantly, we have the associated data to feed into our subsurface models, which has helped us map out the 300-plus core locations that immediately compete for capital in our development program.
So with roughly 85% of these core locations at 1.5 to 2 mile laterals, we can keep the cost per lateral foot low as we shift more of our activity over to the Delaware.
Late in June, we accessed the high-yield capital markets for an oversubscribed, upsized and well-received seven-year $650 million senior unsecured notes issuance.
We used the proceeds from this to fully redeem $543 million of our senior notes maturing in 2023 and reduced borrowings under the RBL.
In the past few weeks, we have added hedges for 2022 oil, including 8,000 barrels of costless WTI collar positions at approximately $60 by $70 and supplemented these with 4,500 barrels per day of swaps at approximately $66.50.
With current strip prices for 2022, hovering around $65 per barrel for WTI, we have made significant progress in securing our conservative planning case price assumptions but maintaining significant upside if the current strip pricing proves accurate.
And finally, speaking to the financing of the Primexx acquisition, we will be paying $440 million in cash.
