For a further discussion of risks related to our business, see our 10-K and subsequent filings with the SEC.
We delivered solid financial results with core FFO per share up 9% year over year and $0.09 ahead of consensus.
Let's turn to our sustainable growth initiatives here on Page 3.
In terms of our social efforts, we recently joined leaders across 85 industries in signing the CEO pledge on CEO action for diversity and inclusion, an initiative to advance diversity and inclusion in the workplace.
Let's turn to our investment activity on Page 4.
We continue to invest in our global platform with 44 projects under way around the world, totaling more than 300 megawatts of incremental capacity scheduled for delivery over the next 18 months.
During the first quarter, we broke ground on the first 26 megawatts on the expansion campus, which are scheduled for delivery next year.
Demand in Frankfurt remains strong, in our campus with access to over 700 carriers and ISPs continues to attract customers from around the world.
Demand in Marseille is largely driven by the 14 subsea cables that terminate in our facilities, where we are transforming a former abandoned World War two U boat bunker into a modern and vital communications hub for over half of the world's population.
Finally, in mid-March, we closed on the sale of a portfolio of 11 assets in Europe for approximately $680 million, executing on our strategy of recycling capital from stabilized assets, reinvesting proceeds into higher growth opportunities while prioritizing long-term value creation over near-term earnings growth.
Let's turn to demand drivers on Page 5.
Market intelligence firm Gartner recently hosted an executive retreat and surveyed over 400 chief data and analytic officers, with 83% of CEOs expecting to increase investments in digital business with a large percentage of these firms prioritizing digital data products to drive growth.
With this transition to data-driven businesses, Gartner predicts that by 2024, more than 75% of companies will deploy multiple data hubs to drive mission-critical data analytics, sharing, and governance.
This award reflects our sharpened focus on driving sustainable design and operations on PlatformDIGITAL, underpinned by ambitious science-based targets to significantly reduce our carbon footprint by 2030.
Let's turn to our leasing activity on Page 7.
We signed total bookings of $117 million in the first quarter.
including a $13 million contribution from Interxion.
Network and enterprise-oriented deals of one megawatt or less totaled $33 million, building upon our consistent momentum and demonstrating the growing success of PlatformDIGITAL as we continue to capture a greater share of enterprise demand.
We landed 100 new logos during the first quarter with strong showings across all regions, again, demonstrating the power of our global platform.
The mix of our new signings was quite healthy, with APAC and EMEA each contributing approximately 30% and the Americas accounting for the remaining 40%.
In addition, nearly 40% of bookings were generated within the megawatt or less plus Interxion category with strength in the e-commerce, gaming, and financial services segments.
Subsequent to quarter end, we landed a leading cloud provider to anchor our Tokyo campus in Inzai, where we've assembled a runway of over 100 megawatts of growth capacity as well as key magnetic connectivity solutions.
A Global 2000 industrial manufacturer leveraged a partner to deploy on PlatformDIGITAL to support growing demand enabled by our global platform and runway for growth on our suburban Chicago campus.
Turning to our backlog on Page 9.
The current backlog of leases signed but not yet commenced reached another all-time high at $307 million.
The step-up from $269 million last quarter reflects $66 million of commencements during the first quarter, offset by roughly $104 million of combined space and power leases signed.
Moving on to renewal leasing activity on Page 10.
We signed $193 million of renewals during the first quarter in addition to new leases signed.
We retained 75% of expiring leases just a bit below our long-term average.
Cash releasing spreads on renewals were negative 2.1%, which was in line with guidance but weighed down by two customers who were new to existing capacity as part of the expansion of their footprint on our platform.
In terms of first-quarter operating performance, overall portfolio occupancy ticked down 100 basis points, driven by anticipated churn in Ashburn as well as the sale of 11 almost fully leased facilities in Europe.
Same capital cash NOI growth was negative 2.8% in the first quarter, in line with guidance and largely driven by the same Ashburn churn.
Turning to our economic risk mitigation strategies on Page 11.
Given our strategy of matching the duration of our long-lived assets with a long-term fixed-rate debt, a 100-basis-point move in LIBOR would have less than a 50-basis-point impact on full-year FFO per share.
In terms of earnings growth, first-quarter core FFO per share was up 9% year over year and $0.09 ahead of consensus.
But substantially, all of the beat flows through to the raise, and we are taking core FFO per share guidance up by $0.075 at the midpoint.
In terms of the quarterly run rate, we still expect the split between first half of the year and the second half of the year to be approximately 49-51.
In other words, as you can see from the bridge chart on Page 12, we expect to dip down by about $0.10 in the second quarter before ramping up fairly steadily over the rest of the year due to the mid-March closing of the non-core European portfolio sale as well as an expected catch-up in OPEX spend previously budgeted for the first quarter.
I would like to point out that although we are raising our G&A forecast by $15 million at the midpoint, Our implied EBITDA margin guidance is unchanged as the lion's share of the increase is due to geography on the income statement as we finalize mapping the Interxion cost structure and have recharacterized a portion of Interxion's OPEX spend as overhead.
with a highly successful EUR 1 billion green bond offering in early January at five-eights in addition to the proceeds from the asset sales in March.
Last but certainly not least, let's turn to the balance sheet on Page 13.
As previously mentioned, we closed on the sale of a portfolio of 11 assets in Europe for approximately $680 million and used the proceeds to pay down debt, bringing net debt to adjusted EBITDA back down to 5.6 times, in line with our long-term target range.
Fixed-charge coverage reached an all-time high of 5.8 times, reflecting the results of our proactive liability management.
In early January, we raised $1 billion of 10.5-year green euro bonds at an all-time low coupon for Digital Realty of 0.625%.
We also retired 350 million of 2.75% bonds due in 2023, and we repaid all 530 million outstanding on the term loan due in 2023.
In mid-April, we announced the redemption of 200 million of preferred stock at six and five-eights, also bring total preferred equity redemptions over the past 12 months to 700 million at a weighted average coupon of just over 6.25, effectively lowering leverage by another 0.3 turns.
As you can see from the chart on Page 13, we've extended our weighted average debt maturity out to nearly seven years while ratcheting our weighted average coupon down to 2.3%.
A little over 70% of our debt is non-U.S. dollar-denominated, reflecting the growth of our global platform and acting as a natural FX hedge for our investments outside the U.S. 94% of our debt is fixed rate to guard against a rising rate environment, and 98% of our debt is unsecured, providing the greatest flexibility for capital recycling.
Finally, as you can see from the left side of the Page 13, we have a clear runway with nominal near-term debt maturities and no bar too tall in the out-years.
