For a further discussion of risks related to our business, see our 10-K and subsequent filings with the SEC.
We delivered solid financial results with core FFO per share $0.08 ahead of consensus, driven by operational outperformance.
Let's turn to our sustainable growth initiatives here on Page 3.
In October, we formally committed to reducing direct and indirect emissions by 68% and indirect emissions in our value chain by area by 24% by 2030, in line with a 1.5-degree climate change scenario.
We set our target with science-based targets initiative, along with over 1,000 organizations that have committed to reduce emissions.
And we also signed the UN Global Compact business ambition for 1.5-degree C, joining leading companies who have committed to ambitious carbon-reduction targets.
In early December, we announced that our operations in France were on target to achieve a carbon-neutral footprint by the end of the year and are expected to remain carbon neutral through 2030 for both existing facilities and future expansion based on Scope 1 and 2 emissions.
We have also joined leaders across 85 industries in signing the CEO pledge on CEO Action for Diversity & Inclusion, an initiative that aims to rally the business community to advance diversity and inclusion in the workplace and to cultivate a trusting environment where employees feel empowered to have discussions on these topics.
Let's turn now to our investment activity on Page 4.
And halfway around the globe, in Sydney, we are under contract to acquire two parcels that will support the development of up to 250 megawatts.
Let's turn to Page 5 for an update on the Interxion integration.
Let's turn to demand drivers on Page 6.
According to the market intelligence firm, IDC, 80% of the world's data will reside within enterprises by the year 2025.
A 451 Research global IT leader survey recently found that 87% of IT leaders will need to maintain local copies of critical data at global points of presence to meet regulatory requirements.
Let's turn to our leasing activity on Page 8.
We signed total bookings of $130 million in the fourth quarter, including a $12 million contribution from interconnection.
Network and enterprise-oriented deals of one megawatt or less totaled $31 million, building upon the consistent momentum throughout the year and demonstrating the growing success of PlatformDIGITAL as we continue to capture a greater share of enterprise demand.
We secured 120 new logos during the quarter with more than half of those new logos landing in EMEA, again, demonstrating the power of our global platform.
EMEA accounted for more than half of our fourth-quarter bookings, while Asia Pacific contributed over 15%.
Turning to our backlog on Page 10.
The current backlog of leases signed but not yet commenced reached an all-time high of $269 million.
The step-up from $229 million last quarter reflects $70 million of commencements during the fourth quarter, offset by roughly $118 million of combined space and power leases signed.
The lag between signings and commencements was a bit longer than our long-term historical average at 8.5 months.
Moving on to renewal leasing activity on Page 11.
We signed $156 million of renewals during the fourth quarter, in addition to new leases signed.
Cash releasing spreads on renewals were plus 1%, and cash rents were positive on renewals above and below one megawatt, an encouraging sign for pricing.
We retained 79% of expiring leases, in line with our long-term historical average.
In terms of fourth-quarter operating performance, overall portfolio occupancy improved 40 basis points, driven primarily by leases commencing on recent deliveries in Ashburn and the sale of a vacant building in Amsterdam.
Same-capital occupancy was down 40 basis points from the third quarter due to no move-outs, partially offset by positive absorption in Silicon Valley and Chicago.
Same-capital cash NOI growth has continued to improve since bottoming in 2019 and ticked up slightly to negative 1.6% in the fourth quarter.
For the full year, same-capital cash NOI growth was negative 1.9% or a little over 100 basis points better than initially expected.
Turning to our economic risk mitigation strategies on Page 12.
Overall, FX represented roughly a 50-basis-point tailwind to the year-over-year growth in our reported results.
Given our strategy of matching the duration of our long-lived assets with long-term fixed-rate debt, a 100-basis-point move in LIBOR would have roughly a 50-basis-point impact on our full-year FFO per share.
In terms of earnings growth, the fourth-quarter core FFO per share was down 0.6% year over year but $0.08 ahead of consensus, driven primarily by operational outperformance.
For the full year, core FFO per share came in $0.22 or nearly 4% ahead of our initial guidance.
We have already made great strides on our financing plans for the year with a highly successful 1 billion green euro bond offering in early January at five-eighths, in addition to solid progress on the capital recycling front.
At the midpoint, our 2021 guidance represents growth of approximately 4%, which includes near-term dilution from capital recycling.
In terms of the quarterly run rate, we expect the split between the first half of the year and the second half of the year to be approximately 49/51.
In other words, as you can see from the bridge chart on Page 13, we expect to dip down by about a $0.05 in the first quarter then to ramp up fairly steadily over the rest of the year.
Given the continued growth in our cash flows and taxable income, we would expect to see continued growth in the per-share dividend, just as we have each and every year since our IPO in 2004.
Last but certainly not least, let's turn to the balance sheet on Page 14.
Fixed charge coverage reached 5.1 times, reflecting the results of our proactive liability management.
Net debt to adjusted EBITDA was slightly elevated at 6.1 times as of year end but is expected to come back down, in line with our long-term range over the course of the year through a combination of proceeds from asset sales and growth in cash flows as leases commenced from the record leasing activity in 2020.
In mid-October, we redeemed GBP 300 million of our 4.75% sterling bonds due in 2023.
We also redeemed $250 million of high-coupon series D preferred at five and seven-eighths.
In early January, we raised GBP 1 billion of 10.5-year green eurobonds at an all-time low coupon for Digital Realty of 0.625%.
We also retired $350 million of 2.75% bonds due in 2023, and we repaid all -- $530 million outstanding on the term loan due in 2023.
As you can see from the chart on Page 14, we've extended our weighted average debt maturity out nearly seven years while ratcheting our weighted average coupon down to 2.3%.
A little over half our debt is euro-denominated, reflecting the growth of our global platform post Interxion and acting as a natural FX hedge for our investments outside the U.S. 90% of our debt is fixed rate to guard against a rising rate environment, and 98% of our debt is unsecured, providing the greatest flexibility for capital recycling.
Finally, as you can see from the left side of Page 14, we have a clear runway with nominal near-term debt maturities and no bar too tall in the out-years.
