The approximately 23% of our portfolio located in Downtown San Francisco, Manhattan and Brooklyn and Downtown, Boston and Cambridge continue to be the most impacted.
We are collecting about 97% of our rents and resident payment behavior has not changed.
We closed on one acquisition in the quarter 158 unit property in suburban Seattle, and easy commuting distance for the growing job center of Bellevue.
The purchase price was $48.9 million.
The property is a brand-new asset in lease-up, and we expect a year two cap rate upon completion of the lease-up to be 4.7%.
This is the only asset that we have purchased this year versus approximately $750 million in 2020 property sales.
On a positive note, the improvement in demand across all locations resulted in a 5% increase in year-over-year movements.
On the renewal side, as we sit here today, we are renewing just over 50% of our residents with approximately 35% of our fourth quarter renewal offers being issued with some renewal increase mostly in the suburban submarkets.
Portfoliowide occupancy is currently running just above 94%.
The suburban portfolio is around 96% with the urban portfolio slightly below 93%.
As disclosed in the release, applications at the company level were up 20% over last year in the quarter, driven by outsized growth in the urban core and this growth accelerated in October, define normal seasonal slowing.
Given the amount of inventory we have available to sell in our urban portfolio, we will need to maintain this velocity through the fourth quarter or reduce turnover in order to continue to hold portfoliowide occupancy at 94%.
70% of the portfoliowide concessions used during the quarter were in Manhattan, Brooklyn, Boston and Cambridge, and Downtown San Francisco.
During the quarter, leasing activity was driven by deal seekers or intra-city moves who represented approximately 75% of total move-ins.
This is up 15% points over last year.
Our occupancy in the market is just below 90%.
Studio apartments which were once our highest occupied unit type prior to the pandemic are now our lowest at 88%.
The market benefits from federal government employment, which has actually seen a net increase over the last 12 months, but the overall job growth has declined.
In addition, Seattle's median income within the city limits increased by 10% and crossed the $100,000 a year threshold, which makes it the third major city to do so.
Overall, market occupancy is now just below 95%, with elevated turnover during the quarter that was heavily concentrated in the Capitol Hill and CBD Belltown submarkets.
Overall, occupancy is now below 93%, while our downtown assets are 87%, East Bay is 96%, and both Peninsula and South Bay are currently at 94%.
Concessions at two months are now common downtown and what used to be a 15% to 20% rent premium between Downtown San Francisco and new supply in Downtown, Oakland is now flat to a 5% discount.
In Los Angeles, the urban portfolio maintained occupancy around 95% through the quarter, while contending with continued pressure from new supply in the Downtown, Koreatown Mid-Wilshire Corridor.
The suburban portfolio continues to show signs of improvement with occupancy staying at or near 97%.
While our portfolio in these markets consist primarily of suburban assets, and were certainly impacted by the pandemic, they have consistently sustained occupancy above 96.5% collectively, while also improving the percent of residents renewing their leases.
