Please be advised that one of our peers is hosting their call at 1 PM Central and so want to be conscious of everyone's time and we'll look to finish the call in one hours.
Strong demand across our markets drove us to achieve physical occupancy of 96.6% in the third quarter, which allowed us to continue to push rental rates.
We now expect our same-store revenues to decline 3.7%.
Our expenses to increase 3.25% and NOI to decline 7% for the full year of 2021.
We expect to produce normalized FFO per share of between $2.95 and $2.97, a 2% increase at the midpoint.
This has caused a convergence in nominal cap rates in the 3.5% or so range for many markets and has created a positive climate for our strategic repositioning efforts.
Year-to-date, we have purchased more than $1 billion of properties and expect to close another $400 million or so in acquisitions, mostly in our expansion markets.
We have funded these buys within approximately equal amount of dispositions of older and less desirable assets, which we sold at an average premium of 10% to our pre-pandemic estimates of value.
Included in these sales are approximately $900 million of California assets.
Currently, approximately 42% of our total assets are in California.
Occupancy is 96.9% today, which is 60 basis points higher than 2019 and 260 basis points higher than the same week in 2020.
Pricing trend, which includes the impact of concessions grew throughout the entire peak leasing season and is now 28% higher than it was on January 1st.
The pandemic caused our net effective pricing to decline by $520 from March to December of 2020 and from January 2021 to today, that same pricing trend has grown $637, which demonstrates a V-shaped recovery and shows that we have more than fully recovered what we had lost in price.
Concession use, which has been a main topic of discussion for the last 18 months is now being used on a very limited basis and inline with pre-pandemic levels, with less than 1% of our applications in September and October receiving an average concession amount of less than two weeks.
New lease change was up 10.1% in the third quarter and is on track to be just over 11% in October.
We renewed 62% of residents in September and October is on track to be just below 65%, which is much better than the 55% historical norm that we thought we were going to stabilize that.
At the same time, renewal rate achieved has continue to improve with September at 7.7% and October on track to be 9%.
What I mean by that is if we snapshot all of our leases in place today and compare them to current market prices, 86% of our residents are paying on average rents that are significantly below current market prices.
The result of this is a net effective loss to lease of 13.6%.
That of course does not mean that we will capture the full 13% in 2022, largely because leases expire throughout the year, not on January 1st.
Third, we expect to get a nice lift from occupancy in the first half of the year, as we were at 95% in the first quarter and 96.2% in the second quarter of this year.
We are currently running above 96.5% and would expect to maintain this level or better in 2022.
Occupancy has been improving in San Francisco over the past month or so and today we are 96.5% and should be well positioned to capture demand and pricing power once the tech companies begin to provide more clarity around return to office plans.
Current occupancy is 95.6%.
Mark mentioned, our same-store expense guidance at 3 in a quarter.
However, about 65% of these costs are ultimately passed back to residents through the utility reimbursements that run through the revenue line.
On the service side, we also leveraged our service mobility platform and new technology to deliver the experience and service that our customers require, which is evident by the all-time high online reputation Google rating of 4.2, all while also reducing the expense pressures.
We have received $18.3 million September year-to-date in this rent relief, with the majority of that coming to us in the third quarter.
This exceeds our prior expectations of $15 million recovered in the full year.
We continue to have good traction in this process and now expect the full year rental relief recoveries of between $25 million and $30 million in 2021.
