Sequential revenues improved 30 basis points in the quarter, with market rents mostly flat in the cities and modestly positive in suburban locations.
As of December 2000, preliminary three month trailing job losses in the Essex markets were -- 7.9% year-over-year, a 150 basis point improvement compared to minus 9.4% for September 2000, and outperforming the nation, which had a 100 basis point improvement from September to -- December.
Even with the recovery of jobs in Q3 and Q4, the nation had 9.2 million fewer jobs year-over-year for the month of December, roughly equal to the number of jobs lost at the worst point of the financial crisis.
Our data analytics team prepared S-17 of the supplemental, which is our base case scenario underlying our expectation that net effective rents will declined 1.9% in 2021.
Our modeling further assumes 4% GDP growth, which should lead to positive momentum in the second half of 2021.
Our data and [Phonetic] analytics team expects approximately 34,000 apartment deliveries in 2021, a modest increase compared to last year.
Page S-17.1 of the supplemental highlights 13 of recent multibillion dollar tech initial public offerings for companies headquartered in the Essex markets.
Overall 2020 was a great year for IPOs, with a 147 tech sector offerings completed during the year, it's our view that the IPO market is essential to recharge the tech ecosystem, providing growth capital to early stage investors and to generate liquidity for reinvestment.
Page S-17.1 also illustrates reacceleration in job openings for the Top 10 tech companies, which has increased 38% since the August trough.
Our analysis indicates that nearly 60% of the total job postings are located in California or Washington, with the next largest state Texas accounting for just 7%.
Page S-17.2 of the supplemental package demonstrates a venture capital investments continued on a record pace in 2020 with approximately $130 billion invested in the US, with the Essex markets continuing to receive the dominant share of these [Phonetic] investment.
A recent McKinsey study estimates that only 22% of the American workforce can work-from-home without any productivity loss.
Recently with the passage of SB 91 last week, the State of California has extended COVID-19 related infection, protection from January 31 to June 30, 2021 including pushing back the requirement to pay at least 25% a pandemic -- related rent.
In addition, the law established a State Rental Assistance Program to allocate $2.6 billion in federal stimulus funds using income levels to prioritize payments and accepting related to applications in March.
During 2020, we sold four properties with a total of 670 apartment homes for $343 million, all of which were placed under contract subsequent to the implementation of shelter-in-place orders in March.
Given lower rents and significant concessions in hard hit cities, recent price talk around possible sales indicate about 5% reduction in value versus the pre-COVID period, resulting in cap rates for high quality properties below 4%.
As with previous recessions, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have continued to provide very attractive financing with seven-year fixed rate financing in the mid-2% range, potentially supporting lower cap rates.
This temporary shift in demand continued in the fourth quarter, where we experienced 7.6% and 9.9% year-over-year increase in quarterly turnover in CBD Seattle and San Francisco compared to the portfolio average turnover of only 1.3%.
We have provided year-over-year net effective rent changes for our portfolio on Page S-17 of our supplemental.
New lease rates were down 8.9% in the fourth quarter, stable in January, and an improvement from the negative 12.2% achieved in the third quarter.
Concessions on same property pool improved from approximately $18 million in the third quarter to $13 million fourth quarter.
In Seattle, 4.9% year-over-year revenue decline was primarily driven by Seattle CBD, which declined by 13%, while the remaining submarkets average [Indecipherable decline.
Year-over-year job growth in Seattle, declined by 7.3% in the fourth quarter.
In Northern California, the 10.4% year-over-year revenue decline was led by CVD, San Francisco and Oakland, averaging an 18% decline, contrast that with a 4.2% decline in Contra Costa County, while Santa Clara County performed in line with the regional average of a 10% decline.
Year-over-year job growth in Northern California declined by 8%, but San Jose sale further at a 6.4% decline.
In Southern California, 7.2% year-over-year decline was primarily driven by LA, CBD and West LA submarkets, averaging a 17% decline, offset by an average decline of 2.4% in our suburban markets of Ventura Orange County, and San Diego.
Fourth quarter year-over-year job growth in Southern California declined by 8%.
As indicated on S-17 of the supplemental, multifamily supply as a percentage of stock remain low at 0.9% for our portfolio.
New completions will once again be concentrated in the CBD's in urban submarkets, where supply is projected to increase by 2.1% compared to just 0.7% across the rest of the portfolio.
In Seattle, we expect multifamily supply as percentage of stock to increase in 2021 by 1.6%, driven by 2.9% in the CBD, offset by a 1% increase in the suburbs where we have the majority of our units.
In Seattle Amazon received approval for a 1.1 million square foot project.
And in Kirkland, Google acquired a 10-acre site for a large campus.
In Northern California, we project overall multifamily supply as a percentage of stock in 2021 to decrease by 10 basis points although Oakland and San Jose CBD are expected to increase by 1.8% and 3% respectively.
Amazon purchased a 6-acre site near downtown San Francisco.
Facebook last month submitted an updated plan for its 1.25 million square foot campus expansion in Menlo Park and Google continue to work with the City of San Jose for its major new campus at Diridon Station.
In addition, the biotech sector continue to be a strong source of office demand highlighted by the recently approved expansion of Genentech's headquarter in South San Francisco which would add up to 4.3 million square foot of new office space.
The most notable increase is 4% LA CBD and deliveries in West LA will remain elevated once again this year.
Because leases are typically one year in duration, our year-over-year revenue growth will be negative in the first half and positive in the second half, leading to our same-store full year guidance of 2.5% of revenue decline at the midpoint.
Lastly, our current same-store physical occupancy is 96.4%.
Our availability 30 day out is 4.7%.
As expected, the fourth quarter was a challenging period with core FFO declining 12.5% compared to one year ago.
This was primarily driven by an 8% decline in same property revenues as a result of higher concessions and delinquencies.
As Angelo mentioned during the fourth quarter, we provided 5 billion fewer concessions than the third quarter, which helped improve same property revenue sequentially.
However, core FFO declined by 4% or $0.13 per share compared to the third quarter of which $0.16 is attributable to lower straight-line rent concessions.
Our receivable balance currently stands at approximately $7 million including joint ventures at pro rata share.
For the full year, we expect core FFO per diluted share to decline by 5.1% at the midpoint.
First, we expect same-property revenues and NOI to decline by 2.5% and 4.6% respectively at the midpoint.
In addition, due to the eviction moratoriums and regulations that remain outside our control, we expect delinquencies will remain elevated in 2021 and will be a drag to core FFO by an estimated $0.45 per share at the midpoint.
We expect this noncash item will result in $0.41 to $0.56 per share decline in core FFO representing about a 4% reduction in growth on a year-over-year basis.
During the fourth quarter, we closed $206 million of new preferred equity investments and bought back $46 million of common stock at a significant discount to NAV.
These investments are being funded with three asset sales totaling approximately $275 million that are under contract and expected to close in the first quarter.
For the year, we were able to arbitrage the difference between public and private market pricing by selling $343 million of assets at prices generally consistent with pre-COVID levels and buying back $269 million of stock at an average price of $225 per share, all while maintaining our balance sheet strength and creating value for our shareholders.
