Yesterday, we reported first quarter 2021 GAAP earnings of $0.62 per share and operating earnings of $0.69 per share, which is in the upper end of our guidance range.
For example, we are stopping all contributions to 501(c)(4)s.
This includes our decision in late March to credit our Ohio utility customers approximately $27 million.
Together, these actions fully address the requirements approved in Ohio House Bill 128 as well as the related rate impact of House Bill 6 on our customers.
If approved, the four-year $50 million program would offer incentives and rate structures to support the development of EV charging infrastructure throughout our New Jersey service territory, in an effort to accelerate the adoption of electric vehicles and provide benefits to our residential, commercial and industrial customers.
And in late March the Pennsylvania PUC approved our five-year $390 million energy efficiency and conservation plan, which supports the PUC's consumption reduction targets.
In March, we closed the transaction to sell JCP&L's 50% interest in the Yards Creek pump-storage hydro plant and received proceeds of $155 million.
And we also announced plans to sell Penelec's Waverly New York distribution assets, which serves about 3,800 customers to a local co-op.
We've identified more than 300 opportunities and now we are diving deeper into these ideas, developing detailed executable plans as we prepare for implementation beginning later this quarter.
We're off to a great start this year, and yesterday we reaffirmed our 2021 operating earnings guidance of $2.40 to $2.60 per share.
For instance, we recently held an event where the Chairman and the Chair of the Compliance subcommittee addressed the company's top 140 leaders, regarding the expectations to act with integrity, in everything we do.
A detailed list of the corrective actions we are taking can be found on Pages 8 and 9 of our first quarter FactBook.
Yesterday we announced GAAP earnings of $0.62 per share for the first quarter of 2021 and operating earnings of $0.69 per share, which was at the upper end of our guidance range.
These drivers were partially offset by $0.10 per share related to the absence of Ohio decoupling revenues and our decision to forgo the collection of lost distribution revenues from our residential and commercial customers.
Our total distribution deliveries for the first quarter of 2021 decreased 2% on a weather-adjusted basis as compared to the last year, reflecting an increase in residential sales of 2% as customers continue to spend more time at home in the first quarter of 2021, a decline of 7% in commercial sales and in our industrial class first quarter low decreased 3%.
It's worth noting that total distribution deliveries through the first quarter are consistent with our internal load forecast, with residential demand 2% higher versus our forecast, while industrial load is down 2%.
We are off to a solid start for the year and are reaffirming our operating earnings guidance of $2.40 to $2.60 per share for 2021.
We've also introduced second quarter guidance of $0.48 to $0.58 per share.
In addition, our strong focus on cash helped drive a $125 million increase in adjusted cash from operations and a $185 million increase in free cash flow versus our internal plan for the first quarter.
In March FirstEnergy transmission issued $500 million in senior notes and a strong well supported bond offering that showcase the strength of our transmission business.
We used the proceeds to repay $500 million in short-term borrowings under the FET revolving credit facility.
In addition, we repaid $250 million at the FirstEnergy Holding Company.
We also successfully issued $200 million in first mortgage bonds at MonPower in April, that was also very well supported.
As to more longer term financing needs through the execution of FE Forward, we have reduced our debt financing plan by approximately $1 billion through 2023, mainly at the FirstEnergy and FirstEnergy Transmission holding companies.
Additionally, as we have previously mentioned, equity is an important part of our overall financing plan, with plans to raise up to $1.2 billion of equity over 2022 and 2023.
These actions combined with new rates at JCP&L and our 60% plus formula rate capital investment program will generate $150 million to $200 million of incremental cash flow each year, while maintaining relatively flat adjusted debt levels through 2023, all of which will support our targeted 12% to 13% FFO to debt range.
Our funding status was 81% at March 31, up from 78% at the end of last year, resulting in a $500 million reduction in our unfunded pension obligation, which improves our adjusted debt position with the rating agencies.
The extended funding timeframe permitted under the American Rescue plan, together with the modification of interest rate stabilization rules means that we do not expect any funding requirements for the foreseeable future, assuming our plan achieves a 7.5% expected return on assets.
