We generated $12.6 billion in revenue as our balanced solution portfolio allowed us to offset weaker consumer spending trends with strong demand for our Banking and Capital Markets Solutions.
Our backlog grew 7% organically to $22 billion.
Our team continues to execute at the highest level as demonstrated by our ability to expand adjusted EBITDA margins by 120 basis points for the full-year, despite near term COVID challenges.
We also made great progress with the Worldpay integration, remaining well ahead of plan and exited the year generating more than $200 million in revenue synergies, and more than $750 million in cost synergies.
We launched over 60 new products in 2020 with a focus on enabling our clients to grow their revenues and operate more efficiently.
We made exceptional progress in integrating Worldpay as well as consolidating platforms and data centers with over 70% of our global compute now running in the cloud.
Given the tremendous achievements from our data center consolidation program and ongoing cost synergies, I am confident in our ability to deliver 45% adjusted EBITDA margins this year and then continue to expand them in each year for the foreseeable future.
As a result, our backlog within the banking business expanded by 8% organically and generated $3.5 billion in new sales during 2020, which is our largest selling year ever.
Cross-selling of new solutions into our existing client base is also up, including a 23% increase in cross-selling solutions to our top 100 clients.
In addition, three of our recent modern banking platform wins are now live, and we project that the modern banking platform will generate in excess of $100 million of revenue in 2021.
Lastly, US Bank, a top-5 bank selected our bill-pay solution due to our simple integration and personalization across digital channels.
We are also seizing the opportunity created by the rapid shift of consumer spending to online and digital channels, where e-commerce volume excluding travel and airlines grew 32%.
We continue to gain traction with our SaaS-based delivery model, which drove a 7% increase in new sales for reoccurring revenue in 2021, including a 19% increase in the fourth quarter.
In addition, new logos contributed to 26% of our fourth quarter new sales and average deal size grew 9% as we continue to add to our portfolio of leading buy side and sell side clients.
Starting on slide 11, I will touch on our fourth quarter results before transitioning to our forward guidance.
On a consolidated basis, organic growth was flat during the fourth quarter and adjusted EBITDA margins expanded by 60 basis points to generate adjusted earnings per share of $1.62.
We expect to exit 2021 generated $400 million of run rate revenue synergies based on strong client demand for our premium payback solution, growing distribution with new bank referral partners as well as geographic expansion and cross sell initiatives across the enterprise.
These revenue synergies will help supplement our organic revenue growth profile, giving us increased confidence in achieving 7% to 9% organic revenue growth on a sustained basis.
We also have line of sight to execute an additional $100 million of operating cost synergies, bringing net total to $500 million, exiting 2021 or 125% of the original opex target.
Turning to segment results on slide 12.
In Banking, organic revenue growth accelerated to 5%, a strong execution more than offset lower termination fees.
Our Merchant segment revenue declined 9% organically or 7% on a normalized basis, when excluding the step up in debit routing synergy that we achieve following the Worldpay acquisition.
Our Capital Market segment continues to exceed expectations with organic growth of 3% in the quarter, which includes about a point of headwind associated with the timing of license renewals.
On slide 13, we provide more detail about how client mix is affecting merchant revenue growth during the pandemic.
Turning to slide 14.
We generated over $3 billion of free cash flow in 2020, which was up about 50% over last year.
We invest over $1 billion in capex in order to drive new technology and solutions to the market.
Even as we continue to invest in innovation and growth, our liquidity position continues to grow and reached $4.6 billion by the end of the fourth quarter, which is up by about $400 million sequentially.
Looking forward, we expect free cash flow conversion to continue to improve, up from 24% of revenue in 2020, increasing to 25% to 27% of revenue in 2021, as we continue to drive integration and efficiency throughout the business.
Turning to slide 15.
Next, share repurchase will continue to be a primary tool for returning excess free cash flow, along with consistent 10% to 15% dividend increase each year.
We recently announced Board approval to buy back 100 million shares, which represents approximately 16% of our shares outstanding, or over $13 billion at current stock price.
I'd like to begin our discussion of '21 guidance with a view into our adjusted EBITDA margin expectations on slide 16.
We expect to achieve 250 basis points to 300 basis points of adjusted EBITDA margin expansion in '21.
We anticipate approximately 100 basis points of margin expansion associated with our ongoing achievement of operating expense synergies.
Unwinding our COVID-related short-term cost actions will create approximately 150 basis points of headwind in 2021, as these costs come back online.
Turning to our guidance on slide 17.
In the first quarter, we expect organic growth of 1% to 2% generating revenues of $3.13 billion to $3.16 billion.
We expect to generate $1.25 billion to $1.28 billion of adjusted EBITDA for a margin of approximately 40% to 40.5%, as we begin to fund our bonus pool.
This will result in adjusted earnings per share of $1.20 to $1.25 for the quarter.
For the full-year, we anticipate revenue of $13.5 billion to $13.7 billion.
This represents 8% to 9% organic revenue growth, which is higher than the 7% to 9% range that we initially expected reflecting our increased confidence as Gary described.
Further, we expect to generate $6 billion to $6.15 billion of adjusted EBITDA for a margin of approximately 45%.
As a result of our accelerating revenue growth and expanding margins, we expect adjusted earnings per share to grow 14% to 17% to a range of $6.20 to $6.40.
