Turning to Slide 3.
As shown on Slide 5, we realized accelerating revenue growth, exceptionally strong new sales and significantly expanded margins across all our operating segments.
As a result, we are increasing our 2021 and 2022 revenue synergy targets to $600 million and $700 million, respectively.
I'm also pleased to share that we divested our remaining minority position in Capco in April, netting a very positive return for our shareholders in over $350 million in proceeds for our remaining stake.
We are quickly becoming one of only eight companies in the S&P 500 with revenues approaching $14 billion, growing more than 7% with an already high and expanding mid-40s EBITDA margins.
Turning to Slide 6.
In banking, new sales grew 17% year-over-year, reflecting a 24% CAGR since the fInvestor Relationsst quarter of 2019 as our investments in new solutions continue to yield impressive results not only in our traditional business but in emerging areas as well.
For example, Green Dot, the world's largest prepaid debit card company with over $58 billion in annual volume, chose to expand our relationship this quarter to now include one of our B2B solutions to support theInvestor Relations commercial customers as well as our online chat and social media solution for customer care to serve theInvestor Relations mobile digital bank.
And I'm pleased to share that 40% of our earlier wins are already live due to our software's elegant and modular design.
We spent the past year migrating more than 1,000 of our issuing clients to this platform and have also seen strong demand from new clients where we've already installed more than 300 new financial institutions since the launch of this solution.
Turning to Merchant on Slide 7.
We revamped our go-to-market strategy, significantly improving new sales results as evidenced by our exceptional 76% growth.
New sales were up 39% over the fInvestor Relationsst quarter of 2019, translating to an 18% CAGR over the past two years.
In this strategic takeaway, we will cross-sell merchant processing to CIT's over 45,000 customers, expanding on an already successful relationship with our banking segment.
We also continue to expand our leading ISV partner network, adding 20 new ISVs in the U.K. this quarter as well as several more in the U.S. and Canada that span a diverse range of verticals from retail, hospitality, salons and spas to event ticketing, education, property management and many others.
As an example, we won 80 new global e-commerce clients this quarter, more than doubling our new sales from last year.
To keep pace with the demand, we are investing to grow our sales force by over 300 more professionals this year.
As we think about newly formed high-growth sectors, FIS is the leading acquInvestor Relationser for cryptocurrency, with revenue from this vertical growing by 5 times over last year.
We serve five of the top 10 digital asset exchanges and brokerages globally, including innovators like Coinbase and BitPay.
We processed over 1.8 billion transactions on NAP during the fInvestor Relationsst quarter and continue to expect accelerating growth now that we are aggressively selling in market.
Turning to Slide 8.
We simultaneously improved margins and moved the business to over 70% reoccurring revenue.
During the fInvestor Relationsst quarter, average deal size increased 36% with new logos representing 30% of new sales, clearly showing that we are winning share.
New sales of our SaaS-based reoccurring revenue solutions are also very strong, increasing by 57% this quarter.
Starting on Slide 11, I will begin with our fInvestor Relationsst quarter results, which exceeded our expectations across all metrics to generate an adjusted earnings per share of $1.30 per share.
On a consolidated basis, revenue increased 5% in the quarter to $3.2 billion, driven by better-than-expected performances in each of our operating segments.
Adjusted EBITDA margins expanded by 10 basis points to 41%.
We continue to make excellent progress on synergies exiting the quarter at $300 million in run rate revenue synergies, an increase of 50% over the fourth quarter's $200 million, accelerating revenue synergy attainment driven primarily by ongoing traction and ramping volumes within our bank referral and ISV partner channels as well as cross-sell wins related to our new solutions and geographic expansion.
Given our progress to date and robust pipeline, we're increasing our revenue synergy target for 2021 by 50% or $200 million to $600 million; and for 2022 by $150 million to $700 million.
We have doubled our initial cost synergy target of $400 million, exiting the quarter with more than $800 million in total cost synergies.
This includes approximately $425 million in operating expense synergies.
Turning to Slide 12 to review our segment GAAP and organic results.
Our Banking segment accelerated to 7% on a GAAP basis or 6% organically, up from 5% growth last quarter.
Our issuing business grew 10% in the quarter, driven primarily by revenue growth from PaymentsOne, increased network volumes and economic stimulus.
Capital Markets increased 5% in the quarter or 3% organically, reflecting strong sales execution and growing recurring revenue.
In Merchant, we saw a nice rebound, with growth of 3% in the quarter or 1% organically, accelerating 10 points sequentially as compared to the fourth quarter.
COVID impacts on travel and aInvestor Relationslines as well as continued lockdowns in the U.K. drove a 5-point headwind in the fInvestor Relationsst quarter.
Slide 13 shows the significant ramp in volumes and revenue that the Merchant business generated throughout the quarter.
We ultimately exited the quarter generating approximately 70% revenue growth during the last week of March, including five percentage points of positive yield contribution.
Based on March exit rates and second quarter comparisons, we expect merchant organic revenue growth of 30% to 35% in the second quarter.
Turning to Slide 14.
We returned approximately $650 million to shareholders in the quarter through our increased dividend and share repurchases.
Starting in March, we bought back approximately 2.8 million shares at an average price of $143 per share.
Beyond this return of capital, we also successfully refinanced a portion of our higher interest rate bonds, which extended our average duration by a year and lower expected interest expense for the year by about $60 million to approximately $230 million.
Total debt decreased to $19.4 million -- $19.4 billion for a leverage ratio of 3.6 times exiting the quarter, and we remain on track to end the year below 3 times leverage.
Turning to Slide 15.
For the second quarter, we expect organic revenue growth to continue to accelerate to a range of 13% to 14%, consistent with revenue of $3.365 billion to $3.39 billion.
As a result of the high contribution margins in our business, we expect adjusted EBITDA margin to expand by more than 400 basis points to approximately 44%.
This will result in adjusted earnings per share of $1.52 to $1.55 per share.
For the full year, we now anticipate revenue of $13.65 billion to $13.75 billion or an increase of $100 million at the midpoint as compared to our prior guidance driven primarily by accelerating revenue synergies.
We continue to expect to generate adjusted EBITDA margins of approximately 45%, equating to an EBITDA range of $6.075 billion to $6.175 billion.
With our improved outlook, successful refinancing and share repurchase to date, we are increasing our adjusted earnings per share guidance to $6.35 to $6.55 per share, representing year-over-year growth of 16% to 20% and an increase of $0.15 at the midpoint above our prior guidance.
