You can find the discussion of our risk factors, which could potentially contribute to such differences, in our 2020 Form 10-K and in our Form 10-Q, which was filed earlier today.
New awards for the quarter were strong at $1.6 billion.
Our largest award in the segment was a $789 million 12-month extension to our management and operations contract for the DOE's Savannah River Site.
Specific to this effort, we received a call from the Air Force in late August, and within a week, we had temporary housing, food, medical and other critical humanitarian assistance for 1,000 evacuees, and an increased total capacity a few weeks later to 5,000.
Currently, more than 4,000 men, women and children call this newly created facility home.
This indefinite delivery -- indefinite quantity award is valued at up to $21 billion over the next 10 years.
In Infrastructure, we booked $316 million in revenue for our share of the I-35E Phase two expansion project in Dallas for TxDOT.
This 6.5 mile long design build project includes full reconstruction and expansion of the existing general purpose lanes as well as the reconstruction of two managed lanes.
During the quarter, we recognized $19 million in forecasted adjustments on a light rail project that has experienced schedule delays and productivity challenges.
The project is approximately 90% complete, and we anticipate project completion next summer.
This is the first of many awards that we were tracking for this facility over the next 12 months.
Results for the quarter were more in line with our expectations, with segment margins of 5.3%.
These positive segment margin results included an $18 million gain recognized on an embedded derivative inside of an equity method investment, which is excluded from our adjusted earnings per share numbers.
New awards in the quarter totaled $644 million compared to $141 million in the third quarter of 2020 and included refining and LNG work in Mexico.
During the third quarter, we crossed the 50% completion mark, and we continue to drive scheduled progress through fabrication and construction activities.
I'm pleased to say that our first 16 modules have shipped, and we expect to receive them at our marine offloading facility starting next week.
These are the first of 192 modules weighing a total of 256,000 tons that will be fabricated and shipped to the site.
Now let's turn to NuScale on Slide 10.
As we mentioned last quarter, we received considerable interest in our carbon-free nuclear power solution, with $193 million received in outside investments this year.
Yesterday, in addition, OSHA released a new emergency temporary standard that will require companies with 100 or more employees to mandate that their staff be fully vaccinated or get weekly testing.
On Slide 12, I want to share a few observations as we head into the final quarter of 2021 and provide a look ahead into 2022.
Currently, we are working on or have recently completed several hundred Study and FEED projects, representing over $170 billion in estimated total installed cost.
Looking ahead, we are tracking over 200 Study and FEED prospects in the next 18 months, representing over $150 billion in TIC across the markets we serve.
During the quarter, we finalized our path forward that includes overhead savings of over $150 million annually when fully implemented.
For the third quarter of 2021, we are reporting a diluted adjusted earnings per share amount of $0.23.
When you include the open market purchases in July, we were able to reduce outstanding debt by $509 million or 30% from the $1.7 billion in total debt outstanding at the end of June.
When we laid out the company's strategic goals in 2024, we included a target debt to total capitalization ratio of 40%.
I'm pleased to report that we were able to accelerate this process, and we are now below that target at 37%, which is a significant improvement from 55% back in January.
Our overall segment profit for the quarter was $110 million or 3.5% and included the $18 million gain for embedded derivatives in Energy Solutions and quarterly new scale expenses of $8 million.
Excluding these items, our total segment profit margin is 3.2%, in line with our guidance for the year.
To give more perspective, year-to-date segment profit margin was 3.3% driven by Energy Solutions at 5.8% and Mission Solutions at 5.3%.
Our ending cash and marketable securities balance was $2.2 billion and reflects cash deployed from the convertible offering to reduce outstanding debt.
Our operating cash flow for the quarter was an outflow of $66 million.
Our G and A expense was $42 million compared to $31 million last quarter.
At the end of the quarter, our backlog contained $1.1 billion in legacy projects that are in a loss position, $900 million of which is related to the Gordie Howe Project.
In our last call, we shared that we had a high interest in Stork, with over 50 parties signing an NDA and receiving an information memorandum.
We now identified over $150 million in annual savings and have started to implement our plan to fully realize this run rate savings by 2024.
When fully realized in 2024, this represents an additional $20 million in annual savings.
Based on current trends, we are raising our adjusted earnings per share guidance from $0.60 to $0.80, up to $0.85 to $1 per diluted share.
We are also adjusting our Q4 segment level guidance and expect margins to be approximately 4% in Energy Solutions, which excludes currency exchange fluctuations and the embedded foreign currency derivative; approximately 4.5% in Urban Solutions; and 3.5% to 4% in Mission Solutions.
Our guidance for the remainder of the year remains modest -- assumes modest revenue increases in Mission and Urban Solutions, full year corporate G and A expenses of $185 million to $195 million and a tax rate of approximately 35%.
And separately, we will file several amendments to deregister shares under SH related to our 401(k) plans and some of our prior compensation plans that are no longer active.
