We continue to hire, probably somewhere between 20 to sometime 30 people in months and we have well over 300 people in the company now.
Our balance sheet remains solid with about $1.4 billion in cash.
But just gearing up to the unveil the Ocean here at the LA Auto Show, where the PR base starts at 17, but we'll actually have a special event the day before which we will stream worldwide.
But what's unique about these two different pack is that the base pack actually is amazing when it comes to cost because it's using LFP, and that's a much lower [indecipherable] and that's how we are currently able to achieve the low-cost of the Fisker Ocean, specifically in that base price of $37,499 which I think is unrivaled by any competitor.
Of course, you can make $150,000, $200,000 carbon incredible range but to make a vehicle, between $50,000 and $60,000 with such a long rate that we have achieved, I think, it's really magnificent, and it really shows what a phenomenal engineering team we have and great partnership we're having with CATL, and I'm really excited to show those numbers at the LA Auto Show.
And as you know, right now, the longest range for sale in the U.S. is about $50,000 to $60,000 for either SUV on Crossovers around 326 miles and we'll be well over that with both these two other vehicles and I'm really excited about that.
So when you get a Fisker Ocean 12 months from now, your technology is the newest of the newest.
So testing of our first build so-called Mule 1 was completed sometime ago.
This continues to Mule 1 testing, but also adds powertrain, the battery electrical system function and platform durability.
Over 90% of the Ocean business materials is now sourced and the remaining components, mostly just off-the-shelf parts.
We have a committed supply of over 5-gigawatt hour per year capacity initially.
We see this a very deep and strategic relationship with CATL and as part of our contract, we have the ability to jointly plan 12 months ahead of time to increase our capacity as we see demand in the market, including opportunities to localize production in various countries globally overtime.
We took action to bolster our balance sheet in August this year, raising $667.5 million in a convertible note offering at 2.5% interest rate and a 30% conversion premium through a cap call.
We use part of the proceeds to find a cap call, reemphasize, we had a 30% conversion premium, and we used part of the proceeds to fund a cap call that takes the effective conversion price to $32.57 or 115% of the cost price at the time of the convert.
We were 100 people last year, we now have over 300 employees that includes 20 extremely seasoned Vice President who have done a great job in building their own departments and the entire organization.
Our R&D increased $15 million at the midpoint.
Our SG&A increased by $10 million due to a more robust marketing plan for Q4 and the flagship store lease I mentioned earlier.
Higher opex was offset by about $25 million lower capex spending which is related to receiving late invoices from suppliers.
