For a discussion of some of the risks and factors that could affect the firm's future results, please see our filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission, including our annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q and current reports on Form 8-K.
We reported fourth quarter revenue of $140.7 million, which was our best quarterly performance ever, an operating margin of 57% and net income of $2.71 per share.
For the year, we had revenue of $311.7 million, an operating margin of 18% and net income of $1.36 per share.
Our quarterly revenue was up 32% and earnings per share was up 158% from the same period last year.
For the full year, our revenue was up 4% and earnings per share was up 202% from the prior year.
Our compensation ratio for the year was 62%, moderately above our target level as we invested much of our non-compensation savings in rewarding our strong performers in what was the challenging year for all.
Our non-compensation costs were down 18% from the prior year, despite the fact that we incurred rent expense on two New York headquarters locations for much of the year as we built out new space.
As one example, the rent expense for our headquarters in 2021 should be $7 million less than it was in 2020, given we have both more expensive space and some months of duplication in the year just ended.
Given the significant opportunities we have found to reduce non-compensation costs, we see increased potential to attain our goal of a 25% operating margin like we achieved for many years of our history, and that is our goal.
Our interest expense for the year was $15.5 million, well below last year's level, as we benefited from a lower interest rate premium post our refinancing last year, lower market interest rate levels, reduced debt outstanding, and the absence of a refinancing charge.
For the quarter, interest expense was $3.5 million, as we continue to benefit from low market rates and debt reduction.
And our borrowing cost is currently around 3.4% and should remain low, based on market expectations of continued low interest rates and our interest expense should continue to decline in line with our pay down of debt.
Going forward, we continued to expect an effective tax rate of around 25%, excluding any charge or benefit relating to the impact of share settlements on vesting restricted stock and assuming no major changes in tax laws in the primary places we operate.
We ended the year with $112.7 million of cash and debt of $326.9 million, meaning we had net debt of $214.2 million.
During 2020, we made principal payments of $38.8 million on our term loan, including a discretionary payment of $20 million at year-end.
Given the uncertainty created by the pandemic, we purchased only 489,704 shares in the open market in 2020, plus another 764,529 share equivalents in connection with tax withholding on vesting restricted stock units for a total cost of $23.3 million.
Our Board has authorized $50 million in repurchases of shares and share equivalents for the year ahead through January 2022.
We also declared our usual quarterly dividend of $0.05 per share.
Second, a couple of weeks ago, we passed the 25-year mark in the life of our firm.
It is obviously not the time for celebrations of any kind, but it is worth noting the fact that our firm has proven resilient through numerous challenges over that quarter of a century, the dot com bubble bursting, the September 11 terrorist attacks, the financial crisis of 2008 and now a major pandemic.
