First, we have derisked the company through market product and geographical diversification with retail energy operations across 16 U.S. jurisdictions, The U.K. and Scandinavia and the rapidly growing solar energy business in the U.S. Second, we differentiate ourselves from the competition through our strong balance sheet with minimal to no debt, an asset-light business model, which not only reduces our relative cost of capital that allows us to self-fund and invest in growth opportunities, such as expanding our international retail energy and domestic solar businesses.
It currently operates in 15 states and Washington, D.C. under a variety of names reselling electricity from both carbon-based and green sources as well as natural gas.
Our current U.S. strategy revolves around opportunistically taking incremental share in our existing 16 markets.
Between The U.K. and Scandinavia, there are roughly 60 million energy meters installed with about 80% of them in The U.K.
We did have some moving parts in the financials due to the sale of our Japanese business and in Texas as the Governor signed review legislation into law, which is expected to provide a minimum of $1.5 million of relief.
Consolidated revenue increased 28% to $98 million, the highest level for any second quarter in our history.
The top line increase was generated predominantly by Genie Retail Energy International, where revenue increased to $28 million from $5 million in the year ago quarter.
In the year ago quarter, Orbit generated $15 million in revenue.
Setting aside the impact of consolidating Orbit revenue in the current period, the international business increased revenue by $8 million year-over-year, driven by the robust growth of our business in The U.K. and Scandinavia.
Revenue at Genie Retail Energy, our domestic retail business, increased 1% to $67 million.
Revenue for our Renewables business was $2.3 million, a decrease from $4.6 million in the year ago quarter, when we delivered the remainder of a large solar panel manufacturing order at a very low margin.
Consolidated gross profit increased 22% to $24 million, a very strong second quarter results with increased contributions from all three of our reporting segments.
Consolidated SG&A increased to $22.4 million from $16 million.
Our consolidated income from operations totaled $1.4 million compared to $2.7 million in the year ago quarter.
Adjusted EBITDA was $3.1 million compared to $3.5 million in the year ago quarter.
Genie Energy's income per diluted share was $0.19 compared to $0.06 in the year ago quarter.
Our bottom line benefited from a $4.2 million gain on the sale of Genie Japan and an unrealized gain of $2.9 million on marketable equity investments, predominantly our investment in holdings that are mark-to-market.
At quarter end, cash, restricted cash and marketable equity securities totaled $50.9 million at June 30, a strong increase from $41.7 million three months earlier and our highest levels in recent years.
