Kevin has been an instrumental leader on our Executive Committee and within Genworth's Global Mortgage Insurance businesses, over his 25-year career at Genworth and its predecessor companies.
Second, we ended the year in a very strong liquidity position with approximately $1.1 billion of cash, enabling us to pay off our February debt maturity of $338 million.
The expense reductions completed in January, which included impacts to people, processes and programs, are expected to reduce annualized expenses by $50 million.
Genworth is the leader in Long-Term Care Insurance, with 40 years of experience and expertise that we can leverage to help create a much stronger, more viable industry standard model that meets the demands of an aging population.
As I shared on our January 5 call, we had a very successful fourth quarter for LTC rate action approvals with over $160 million in additional premium increases achieved.
As of year-end 2020, we achieved approvals on more than $1 billion of annualized in-force premiums, representing a weighted average premium increase of 34% or $344 million on an annual incremental premiums going forward.
On a cumulative net present value basis from 2012 through the end of 2020, we have achieved approximately $14.5 billion of approved LTC premium rate increases.
Going forward, the U.S. Life Insurance businesses will continue to rely on their consolidated statutory capital of approximately $2.3 billion as of the end of the third quarter, significant claim and ALR reserves, prudent management of in-force blocks and actuarially justified rate actions to satisfy obligations to our policyholders.
Genworth has also delivered solid operating performance over the last several years led by strong results in U.S. MI, which grew adjusted operating income at a 27% compound annual growth rate from 2014 to 2020, which is among the fastest growth rates in the mortgage insurance industry.
In the fourth quarter, Genworth reported net income of $267 million and adjusted operating income of $173 million.
U.S. MI reported adjusted operating income of $95 million for the quarter and reported a record level of new insurance written for the full year.
Australia MI reported an adjusted operating loss of $16 million for the quarter, impacted by higher losses from reserve strengthening compared to the prior quarter and prior year.
The U.S. Life companies reported quarterly adjusted operating income of $129 million.
This was driven by LTC Insurance adjusted operating income of $129 million, net of reserve strengthening.
The strong LTC results reflect the cumulative benefits of $14.5 billion of LTC premium increases since 2012, a $75 million year-over-year increase in net investment income and significantly higher LTC claim terminations and lower claim incidents because of the COVID-19 pandemic.
We reported net income available to Genworth shareholders for the quarter of $267 million and adjusted operating income of $173 million.
Included in net income for the quarter was $160 million in realized investment gains, primarily from the mark-to-market on certain securities and derivatives gains, partially offset by a $30 million loss from discontinued operations.
MI reported adjusted operating income of $95 million at a loss ratio of 35%.
Primary new insurance written in U.S. MI was $27 billion in the quarter, up 49% versus the prior year, primarily driven by higher refinancing activity and a larger Private Mortgage Insurance market.
While we're pleased with our NIW levels and primary insurance in force growth of 14% versus the prior year, the low interest rate environment and high refinance activity has driven low persistency levels in our insurance portfolio with varying impacts to our business.
Low persistency has increased single premium cancellations which have remained elevated throughout 2020 and benefited premiums during the quarter by $32 million, which was unchanged from the prior quarter.
In addition, our 2005 through 2008 legacy books now comprise only 5% of our risk in force.
While new primary delinquencies during the fourth quarter were still elevated versus pre-COVID levels, they were down 28% sequentially, with approximately 56% of new primary delinquencies being recorded in forbearance plans.
We ended the quarter with approximately 44,900 total primary delinquencies or a delinquency rate of 4.86%, both of which decreased sequentially, as cures outpaced new delinquencies in the quarter.
In total, approximately 31,800 or 71% of our prior delinquencies are in forbearance.
Our servicer reported forbearance trends continue to decline from peak levels in May 2020 and ended the fourth quarter with 5.4% or approximately 50,000 of our active primary policies reported in a forbearance plan, with 37% of those in forbearance still reported as current.
The $37 million pre-tax reserve increase in the quarter, primarily reflects our expectation that prior delinquencies and forbearance plans will have a higher claim rate than our initial best estimate, given the slower emergence of cures relative to our original expectations as well as the ongoing economic impact due to the pandemic.
With this adjustment, our current blended claim rate estimate for all COVID delinquencies or delinquencies since April that remain outstanding at year end is approximately 7%.
Approximately 2.4% of total Australia households are utilizing these programs, down from 7% last quarter.
For Australia MI, over 8,100 loans or approximately 1% of our insured loans are currently participating in these forbearance programs, down from approximately 31,000 loans reported at September 30, 2020.
GAAP loss reserves by $88 million pre-tax, the majority of which was a result of a refinement in methodology that recognizes losses earlier on average, primarily through the IBNR reserve.
Including this reserve update, the adjusted operating loss for Australia for the fourth quarter was $16 million compared to adjusted operating income of $7 million in the prior quarter and $12 million in the prior year.
GAAP loss ratio for the quarter was 122%.
Strong mortgage origination volumes supported by low interest rates drove $6.7 billion of flow NIW, which was up 18% sequentially and 29% versus the prior year.
Life, the segment reported adjusted operating income of $129 million in the quarter compared to adjusted operating income of $14 million in the prior quarter and an adjusted operating loss of $115 million in the prior year.
In Long-Term Care, adjusted operating income was $129 million in the fourth quarter compared to $59 million in the prior quarter and $19 million in the prior year.
In the fourth quarter, we increased claim reserves by $91 million pre-tax, as noted on Page 13 of the investor materials, reflecting our view that the remaining claim population is less likely to terminate than the pre-pandemic average.
As a result, we further strengthened our IBNR reserve by $47 million pre-tax in the quarter after strengthening this reserve by $24 million pre-tax in the prior quarter.
Net investment income for LTC was up $29 million after tax versus the prior quarter and $40 million versus the prior year from higher limited partnership and variable investment income.
For the year, Genworth received approvals impacting approximately $1 billion of premiums with a weighted average approval rate of 34%.
Page 15 in the investor materials illustrates the cumulative approvals by product series.
The fourth quarter included an estimate of approximately $16 million after tax in COVID-19-related claims based on death certificates received to date, bringing the full-year amount to $39 million after tax.
Term life insurance products continue to be negatively impacted by shock lapses that are higher than our original locked-in assumptions as the large 20-year level premium term life insurance business written in 2000, enters the post level premium period.
Total term insurance DAC amortization, a noncash impact, primarily related to these term life lapses, reduced earnings by $18 million after tax compared to $34 million in the prior quarter.
As sales levels declined in the second half of 2000, we expect amortization related to term policies entering the post level period to continue to decrease into 2021.
In fixed annuities, adjusted operating earnings of $20 million for the quarter was lower compared to the prior quarter and prior year, driven by lower mortality and lower net spreads in single premium immediate annuities.
These products continue to decline since we suspended the sales in 2016 with a total AUM, excluding favorable market impacts of $0.2 billion, down 11% in 2020 to $11.8 billion.
In the runoff segment, our adjusted operating income was $13 million for the fourth quarter, down sequentially and versus the prior year.
Our variable annuity products continued to decline since we suspended sales in 2011 with total AUM excluding favorable market impacts of $0.5 billion, down 11% in 2020 to $5 billion.
Our active life margins in LTC remained flat versus the prior year at $500 million to $1 billion.
We now project the need for $22.5 billion in LTC premium increases and benefit reductions on a net present value basis.
As Tom mentioned, since 2012, we've achieved $14.5 billion of this amount, leaving a need of approximately $8 billion remaining.
We also completed our actuarial assumption updates for our life insurance products during the fourth quarter with a net benefit of $10 million after tax.
Model refinements in term universal life, that I previously mentioned, and updates for mortality, persistency and interest rates in our universal and term universal life products resulted in a net benefit of $60 million after tax.
This was partially offset by a $50 million after-tax charge related to universal life DAC recoverability testing, primarily related to these updates.
As we noted last quarter, certain of our universal life insurance products with secondary guarantees, require a separate testing on a statutory basis called AG 38, 8D, which uses a prescribed reinvestment rate from July to June each year.
The decline in rates during this period drove the need to increase statutory reserves by approximately $230 million in 2020, which we believe will negatively impact our risk-based capitals for Genworth Life Insurance Company, or GLIC, by approximately 20 points.
Corporate and others adjusted operating loss is $48 million for the fourth quarter and was in line from the prior quarter and prior year.
In U.S. MI, we finished the quarter with a PMIERs sufficiency ratio of 137% or approximately $1.2 billion above published requirements as of year-end 2020.
The improvement in our PMIERs efficiency versus the prior quarter was driven by an insurance-linked note transaction executed in October, which provided $311 million of PMIERs credit at year-end 2020 and elevated lapse from prevailing low interest rates.
In January, we received regulatory approval for XOL reinsurance on our 2021 book of NIW, which will provide up to $210 million of PMIERs credit on a portion of current and expected new insurance written for the 2021 book.
Our Australia MI business ended the quarter with an estimated prescribed capital amount or PCA ratio of 165%, which is approximately AUD 200 million above the high end of the management target range of 132% to 144%.
During the quarter, the Australia business successfully renewed its AUD 800 million reinsurance program, which was effective January 1, 2021.
Absent any impact from cash flow testing, we would expect capital at Genworth Life Insurance Company, or GLIC, as a percentage of company action level RBC at year-end to be above the prior year, including the AG 38, 8D impact, that I just mentioned.
For holding company cash, we ended the quarter in a very strong cash position with $1.1 billion of cash and liquid assets or approximately $740 million above our targeted cash buffer.
I would note this excludes approximately $300 million in cash held at U.S. MI's intermediate holding company, Genworth Mortgage Holdings, Inc., that under current GSE restrictions must be used for interest expenses for the August 20 debt issuance or as capital contributions to the operating company.
Approximately $340 million of the Genworth holding company cash balance was used to pay the principal of our February 2021 senior note maturity.
