The net result of our stable in-place portfolio and a continued execution of our investment strategies was a 4.5% increase in total revenues, and almost 19% increase in adjusted funds from operations and 11.4% increase in AFFO per share.
The Company invested $44.1 million for the quarter, and another $4.6 million just after quarter end, bringing our year-to-date total investment activity to $79 million in aggregate.
The Company also continues to benefit from the strong performance of target asset classes, as evidenced by our stable rent coverage of 2.6 times.
As at the end of the quarter, our portfolio includes 994 net lease properties, six active redevelopment sites and five vacant properties.
Our weighted average lease term was approximately 8.9 years and our overall occupancy, excluding active redevelopments, remain constant at 99.5%.
Our portfolio remains spread over 35 states plus Washington D.C. and our annualized base rents 65% of which come from the top 15 MSAs in the US, continue to be well covered by our trailing 12-month tenant rent coverage ratio of 2.6 times.
In terms of our investment activities, we had another busy quarter in which we invested $44.1 million in 53 properties and subsequent to the quarter and we acquired one additional property for $4.6 million, bringing our year-to-date investment activity to $79 million across 60 properties.
Our completed acquisitions during the second quarter included the purchase of 46 Valvoline-branded oil change centers for $31 million.
The triple net leases which are guaranteed by Valvoline Inc. were acquired with 11.5 years of remaining base term and have multiple renewal options.
Additionally, we've closed on the acquisition of three additional car wash properties for $10.4 million during the quarter.
These properties were added to our existing unitary lease with WhiteWater Express car wash and have approximately 15 years remaining of the base term with multiple renewal options.
Subsequent to the quarter end, the Company acquired a Mavis Tire center located in the Chicago, Illinois MSA for $4.6 million.
Getty also funded an additional $2.7 million of construction loans for four new-to-industry convenience stores with Refuel, a c-store operator with more than 100 locations across the Southeast United States and Texas, bringing the total amount funded by Getty to $11.1 million year-to-date.
During the quarter, we invested approximately $200,000 in sites which are in our pipeline.
At quarter end, we had 11 signed leases or letters of intent, which includes six active projects, four signed leases on properties which are currently subject to triple net leases, but which have not yet been recaptured from the current tenants and one signed letter of intent on a vacant property.
At quarter end, rent commenced on a redevelopment project leased to 7-Eleven in Baltimore and Maryland MSA.
We invested approximately $125,000 in the project, expect to generate a return of nearly 40% on that investment.
In total, we have invested approximately $2.1 million in the 11 redevelopment projects in our pipeline and estimate that these projects will require total investment by Getty of $7.8 million.
I'll start with a recap of earnings, AFFO, which we believe best reflects the Company's core operating performance was $0.49 per share for the second quarter, representing a year-over-year increase of 11.1%.
NAREIT FFO was also $0.49 per share for the quarter.
Our total revenues were $38.7 million, representing a year-over-year increase of 4.5%.
Rental income, which excludes tenant reimbursements and interest on notes and mortgages receivable, grew more than 8% to $34.4 million.
Strong acquisition activity over the last 12 months and the current [Indecipherable] our leases were the primary drivers of the increase, additional contribution from rent commencements at nearly [Phonetic] all the projects.
Turning to the balance sheet, our capital markets activities, we ended the quarter with $542.5 million of total debt outstanding, including $525 million of long-term fixed-rate unsecured notes and $17.5 million drawn against our $300 million revolving credit facility.
Our weighted average borrowing cost was 4.2% and the weighted average maturity of our debt was 6.8 years.
In addition, our total debt to total market capitalization was 29%, our total debt to total asset value was 38% and our net debt-to-EBITDA was 5 times.
We were selective with equity issuance under our ATM program during the quarter, raising $9.5 million at an average price of $32.94 per share.
Year-to-date, we've raised a total of $30.3 million through the ATM program.
With respect to our environmental liability, we ended the quarter at $47.9 million, which was a decrease of $150,000 from the end of 2020.
For the quarter, net environmental remediation spending was approximately $1.4 million [Phonetic].
Finally, as a result of our investment and capital markets activities in the first half of the year, we're raising our 2021 AFFO guidance to a range of $1.89 to $1.91, a $0.03 per share increase from our prior guidance.
