In Brazil, the Siem Helix 2 worked the entire quarter.
The Siem Helix 1 completed its contract with Petrobras in August.
Revenues were report -- reported $181 million with a net loss of $19 million and EBITDA of $27 million.
Our gross profit was $3 million or 2%.
On to Slide 8.
From a balance sheet perspective, our cash balance at the end of the quarter was $238 million with an additional $71 million in temporarily restricted cash associated with the short LLC -- short term LC for our work in West Africa.
During the third quarter, we generated $29 million of operating cash flows and spent $1 million on capex, with the resulting free cash flow of $28 million.
Year to date, we've generated $121 million of operating cash flow and $114 million of free cash flow.
During the quarter, we entered into a new $80 million asset-based revolving credit facility and paid off our term loan.
We achieved a long-standing financial goal of ours by reaching net debt zero and ended the quarter with a negative net debt balance of $4 million.
Moving on to slide 7.
In the third quarter, we continue to operate 14 vessels globally with minimal operational disruption, continually operating at exceptional standards with 98.5% uptime efficiency.
On to Slide 11.
During the third quarter, we produced revenues of $181 million resulting in a gross profit margin of 2%, producing a gross profit of $3 million, producing EBITDA for the third quarter of $27 million compared to $162 million revenue, $3 million gross profits and EBITDA at $25 million in the second quarter.
In the third quarter, the well intervention fleets achieved utilization of 72% globally with 72% utilization in Brazil with the completion of the long-term Siem Helix 1 contract for Petrobras.
Utilization increased to 74% in the Gulf of Mexico with 57% utilization in the North Sea and utilization increased to 100% in West Africa.
The Robotics chartered-vessel fleet achieved utilization of 99% globally, increasing to 358 vessel days during the quarter compared to 236 days in the second quarter.
Operating performance in Brazil was at the usual high standard with the Siem Helix 1 safely completing works with zero [Indecipherable] and then demobilizing from the Petrobras contract.
The Siem Helix 2 was 100% utilized producing a strong quarter.
The Robotics chartered-vessel fleet achieved high utilization in the quarter working between ROV support, trenching and renewable works globally, completing 358 days.
176 days work was undertaken on four projects using spot charter vessels, including one vessel conducting our first project offshore Guyana.
Slide 12 provides a more detailed review of our operations for our Well Intervention business in the Gulf of Mexico.
The Q5000 increased utilization to 77% compared to 72% in Q2, performing production enhancement operations in ultra deepwater for three clients with some small scheduled gaps between projects.
The Q4000 increased utilization to 71% compared to 45% in Q2, completing production enhancement works for two clients in ultra deepwater followed by two small construction projects for two clients.
In the third quarter, the Helix 1 J-line's team was successful in being awarded the BP Gulf of Mexico riser based well intervention vessel and services package for a three-year quota contracts plus options.
And in recent weeks, we've been awarded approximately 250 days for the Gulf of Mexico Q units from nine clients to work in the fourth quarter and the first quarter of 2022.
Moving to Slide 13, our North Sea Well Intervention business continues to be most affected by reduced work opportunities related to COVID 19.
The Well Enhancer achieved 57% utilization in Q3 working for two clients in the quarter, including completing production enhancement scopes.
The Seawell achieved 56% utilization working for three clients, the vessel completed the diving scope for one customer and completed production enhancement works for the following customer followed by full [Indecipherable] abandonment program for the third customer.
Moving to Slide 14.
In Brazil, both vessels achieved strong performance with zero commercial downtime in the third quarter, the Siem Helix 1 at 45% utilization in Q3 with no commercial downtime for the safe completion of the Petrobras contract and demobilization in mid-August.
The Siem Helix 2 had 100% utilization and completed abandonment work on three wells and production enhancement work on two wells during the quarter.
We are currently discussing the possible expansion with Petrobras regarding the Siem Helix 2 but the outcome of those discussions remains to be seen, and we are identifying other opportunities globally.
Moving to slide 15 for our Robotics review.
In the APAC region the Grand Canyon 2 had 100% utilization in Q3.
The vessels contracted in Thailand undertake an unexpected 210 days [Indecipherable] decommissioning projects removing 125 robots from the sea floor and is expected to continue into Q1 of 2022.
In the North Sea, the Grand Canyon 3 was utilized 98% undertaking two oil and gas trenching projects, a renewable trenching project for another client, and the teleconference project for a new client.
The chartered vessels in the [Indecipherable] continued site clearance and survey works for 53 days on a wind farm project that is now expected to last until late Q4.
The project started [Indecipherable] commenced work on a [Indecipherable] clearance and detonation projects for 46 days, and is also expected to continue into the latter part of Q4.
The project chartered Siem Dorado was contracted for a cable installation projects on our first offshore work Guyana for 77 days in the quarter.
Over to Slide 16.
Moving to slide 18, it outlines our debt instruments and their maturity profile at [Technical Issues] our total [Technical Issues] $340 million at the end of Q3.
Moving on to slide 19.
With $309 million of cash and restricted cash as of September 30, we are in a negative net debt position of $4 million at quarter end.
Our cash position at the end of Q3 was $238 million with an additional $71 million of restricted cash that supports a temporary project LC.
During the quarter we paid off our term loan and entered a new $80 million ABL revolving credit facility with availability driven primarily by our US and UK-based receivables.
At quarter end, we had no amounts outstanding and 70 million of availability under the ABL.
For a discussion on our outlook we move to 22, 23.
Revenues $600 million to $645 million, EBITDA $85 million to $100 million, and free cash flow $80 million to $120 million.
We received approximately $12 million CARES Act tax refund in Q3.
To provide a bit more color to our key assumptions by segment and region on Slide 22, first our Well Intervention segment.
In Brazil, the Siem Helix 2 is on contract into December, the Siem 1 completed its dry-dock in mid-October and is available in the spot market.
Moving to our Robotics segment on Slide 23.
The Grand Canyon 2 in APAC is on contract in Thailand into Q4 and possibly longer.
The Grand Canyon 3 is contracted to be performing trenching in the North Sea with expected strong utilization in Q4.
Continuing on slide 24.
Moving -- just [Indecipherable] our capex forecast range is $15 million to $25 million.
Reviewing our balance sheet, our funded debt decreased to $314 million with our retirement of our term loan cash position at the end of Q3 was $238 million.
This does not include the $71 million of temporarily restricted cash that supports our project LC.
We have received $7 million tax refund in Q1 and the $12 million in Q3, a product of the tax changes from the CARE Act.
As previously stated, we achieved net debt zero during Q3 and ended the quarter with a negative net debt of $4 million.
I'll skip Slide 26 for your reference.
The first vessel, the Siem Helix 1, has now completed its four year contract and the Siem Helix 2 contract expires at the end of the year.
We are in negotiations with Petrobras for an extension of the contract for the Siem Helix 2.
We initially believe that there is potential for 150-day campaign every other year.
We are anticipating meaningful rate increases by 202.
It's a bit lumpy as is the market, but the expected EBITDA contribution on a lumpy basis is anywhere from $8 million to $20 million a year.
