We're incredibly excited to share this next phase of our strategic transformation, what we call Block Horizons 2025.
Now as I've said from Day 1, we believe we can serve more customers in more ways by better leveraging our existing assets.
Karen's expertise is informed by 20 years at the company in a variety of finance and operational roles.
Les is one of the leading experts on payments in North America with more than 25 years of experience in technology and banking and financial services.
Tony has provided me and the team with invaluable insight from his 16 years at the company, helping to ensure that our business strategy, financial strategy, and capital priorities are all in sync.
During this thorough review, we explored more than 20 different adjacencies.
In fact, over the last few years, over half of our vice presidents and 45% of our directors are new to Block or have been promoted to a new role.
And even with this significant change, our associate engagement scores remain very high at 85%.
We've grown total clients by 1.9 million customers, or an annual rate of 6.3%.
In small business, many people are surprised to learn that we already serve over 2 million customers, so we have a strong base.
First, we have a huge base of business, with 2.4 million small business customers across both platforms.
And we're driving almost $500 million of annual revenue from these customers, which means there's a significant level of trust in our products and services and a solid foundation from which we can accelerate growth as we apply purposeful focus.
I've started three companies, and 50% of Wave's team has owned small businesses.
Before the pandemic, there were 32 million small businesses in the U.S. with about 100,000 new ones starting each month.
They generate $7 trillion in annual revenue.
We estimate that more than 80% of entrepreneurs use no software at all to track income and expenses.
We expect that small businesses will lead the recovery just as they did after the Great Recession in 2009.
As we look at the market opportunity, we are focused on small businesses with zero to nine employees and annual revenue of $10,000 or more.
In fact, about 25% of our retail network already provides additional business services to these clients.
More than half of them recalled the P&L, and more than 65% of these clients gave it the highest value scores.
We have 360 Block Advisors locations today, and we have 30,000 tax professionals across our H&R Block network with the knowledge to support small businesses.
We'll have more than 7,500 H&R Block locations with certified Block Advisors tax pros inside them, providing our new small business products and services.
In fact, every 1-percentage-point increase in small business tax share could generate $60 million in new revenue for us.
To give you an idea of scale, we currently have over 260,000 monthly active users in North America.
More than 75% of them use our invoicing functionality.
They send over $22 billion in invoices every year.
And Wave processes over $2 billion in annualized payments through our credit card and bank payment systems.
I also want to call out our payroll product, which pays tens of thousands of employees every month and moves over $650 million in wages and payroll taxes every year.
Overall, last quarter, Wave revenue grew 31% year over year, and our current positioning in the market is strong.
About 90% of the dollar volume passing through Wave invoices or around $20 billion annually is not flowing through our payment system right now.
24% of American households are underbanked.
It's a total of 31 million according to the FDIC.
In the recent FDIC study on how America banks, 29% of unbanked customers said the main reason they did not have a bank account was that they could not meet these minimum balance requirements.
The average minimum to waive monthly fees is now $12,000, triple what it was in 2013.
And just 29% of traditional banks still offer free checking accounts, down from 37% in 2013.
In addition, consumers paid over $30 billion in overdraft fees.
To say that again, $30 billion.
To put that in perspective, it works out to everyone in the U.S. between ages of 20 and 64, paying $156 a year in overdraft fees.
And just one of these $35 fees can be devastating for the underbanked.
in 2019, down 7% from the peak in 2012.
Specifically, H&R Block already serves the tax preparation needs of 8 million underbanked customers.
Our customer research suggests that nearly nine out of 10 underbanked Block customers would trust us to provide banking services.
In addition, 67% described themselves as likely to open a mobile bank account through Block if offered with their desired features.
Of the 20 million customers who use our tax preparation services annually, about 80% get a tax refund.
Today, almost 2 million customers receive those refunds on our Emerald Card, which is often the single largest deposit of a year.
with $9 billion deposited annually.
Second, as we increase convenience and ease, intent to return also increases, as much as 8 percentage points year over year.
As I mentioned earlier, we've already seen that being able to choose among many service options is appealing across our base of more than 20 million customers regardless of their age, income level, or other demographic indicators.
In fact, we're targeting that within a few years, at least 50% of assisted clients are using digital services in part of their tax journey.
As our DIY experience has evolved, customers have noticed, with Net Promoter Scores improving more than 10 percentage points and retention increasing by more than 2 percentage points in the last two years.
We're developing ways we can use more of what we know about returning clients to help them complete their farms more quickly and accurately, with the goal of reducing total time to complete by up to 50%.
As we execute our three imperatives, we are targeting consistent annual revenue growth of 3% to 6%.
For example, with revenue growth of 4%, EBITDA is expected to grow one and a half times faster than revenue and earnings per share would grow two and a half times faster.
Our goal is to identify $150 million in cost reductions by 2025 to provide the investments needed for future growth.
For our small business imperative, we will be sharing total small business customers, showing the growth from our base of 2.4 million across Block and Wave, along with revenue per small business customer.
And with our recent $650 million debt offering and continued access to our $2 billion line of credit, we are well-positioned from a liquidity perspective.
During Q2 for example, we repurchased 9.5 million shares at an average price of $15.83.
And during my tenure as CFO, we have repurchased 19% of shares outstanding.
We have $600 million remaining on our authorization, which runs through June of 2022.
For the full year, we expect revenue of $3.5 billion to $3.6 billion.
We also expect EBITDA of $950 million to $1 billion, which will generate significant free cash flow.
Our effective tax rate will be 18% to 20%, down from our typical range of 23% to 25% due to some favorable tax planning.
To summarize, we are executing on Block Horizons with five core principles in mind: first, sustainable annual revenue growth of 3% to 6%; second, EBITDA and earnings per share growing at a rate faster than revenue, given the operating leverage in our business; third, funding the future through efficiencies and cost reductions and redeploying the savings to the highest ROI opportunities; fourth, maintaining a strong balance sheet and liquidity position; and last, continuing to return capital via dividends and share buybacks.
