You can learn more about these risks in our Form 10-K for fiscal 2020 and our other SEC filings.
The result was a strong finish, growing revenue 300% in the quarter and serving more clients than last tax season.
In total, our digitally enabled returns grew over 150%.
Online growth was 10.6%, which led the total DIY return growth of 8% as we held share in the category when excluding stimulus returns.
We believe there are between seven million to eight million returns with $1 of income and are being tracked as stimulus filers.
Instead, we saw just a 40 basis point decline in assisted e-files and a moderate change in mix between assisted and DIY when excluding the estimated number of onetime stimulus filings.
In fact, during the pandemic from mid-March through mid-July, assisted filings actually increased 50 basis points, which is telling considering the circumstances.
for the third consecutive year with a 3.3% increase in returns.
This was led by continued strength in our DIY business with a 10.6% increase in online filings.
Our finish to the tax season was strong, however, resulting in a decline in returns of just 2.8% and a small share loss.
Following a couple of months of flat year-over-year revenue, I'm pleased to report that we've seen progressively better results in the subsequent months, resulting in year-over-year growth of nearly 20% during the quarter.
The increase in tax filing volume in Wave's contribution resulted in revenue of $601 million in the fiscal first quarter, an increase of $451 million or 300% compared to the prior year.
These increases were partially offset by other expense reductions, resulting in an overall increase in operating expenses of just 30% to $448 million.
Interest expense increased $11 million as a result of our line of credit being fully drawn, which I'll discuss later.
The net result of revenues increasing at a greater rate than expenses was pre-tax income from continuing operations of $124 million compared to last year's pre-tax loss of $207 million, which is typical for our fiscal first quarter.
GAAP earnings per share improved to $0.48 compared to a prior year loss of $0.72, while non-GAAP earnings per share improved to $0.55 compared to a loss of $0.66.
Given the strong finish to the tax season, we had a cash position of $2.6 billion at the end of the quarter, and as such, intend to pay down the full balance of the draw later this month.
I'm pleased with our successful issuance of $650 million of 10-year notes at a coupon of 3.875%.
This was a positive result for us as we're replacing 5-year notes with 10-year notes at a lower interest rate.
We have continued our streak of paying quarterly dividends consecutively since going public nearly 60 years ago.
And while we cannot guarantee future dividend payments with the level of dividend would be at that time, we do have a goal of increasing the dividend over the long term as evidenced by the 30% increase over the past five years.
From a financial perspective, we expect this agreement to result in savings of $25 million to $30 million on a run rate basis.
Though that number will be approximately $10 million lower in fiscal '21 as we are transitioning midyear and will incur some onetime expenses.
