IDACORP's 2021 first quarter earnings per diluted share were $0.89, an increase of $0.15 per share from last year's first quarter.
Today, we also affirmed our full year 2021 IDACORP earnings guidance to be in the range of $4.60 to $4.80 per diluted share, with our expectation that Idaho Power will not need to utilize in 2021 any of the additional tax credits that are available to support earnings in Idaho under its regulatory settlement stipulation.
For Idaho Power, as noted on Slide 5, the first quarter of this year saw a continuation of the strong customer growth.
In March alone, we saw an annualized customer growth rate of 3.5%.
On Slide 6, you'll see highlighted a few publicly announced large load expansions and projects.
Unemployment within Idaho Power's service area is now down to 3.7%, remaining well below the 6% rate reported at the national level, and total employment in our service area declined a modest 0.3% since March of last year.
The Moody's forecast now calls for growth of 8% in 2021, 8.1% in 2022 and continued strong growth of 6.8% in 2023.
You'll see some of the items I mentioned highlighted on Slide 7.
Last quarter, we stated Idaho Power does not plan to file a general rate case in Idaho or Oregon in the next 12 months.
That remains true today as we look at the next 12 months.
As a reminder, we expect to spend approximately $47 million in incremental O&M and $35 million in incremental capital expenses for wildfire-related infrastructure work over the next five years.
However, we entered the upcoming spring and summer seasons with strong reservoir storage so we expect relatively healthy water conditions for irrigation customers, though it is likely that hydropower generation will be lower than our 30-year average.
Let's now move to Slide 9, where you'll see our first quarter 2021 financial results as compared to the same period in 2020.
Altogether, IDACORP's first quarter 2021 net income was higher by $7.3 million.
On the table of quarter-over-quarter changes, you'll see customer growth added $3.7 million to operating income.
Lower usage per commercial customer down 2%, partly due to COVID-19 impact, was largely offset by higher residential usage due to colder weather this year versus last.
The net result was a relatively modest $1.3 million decrease in overall usage per customer.
The next change on the table shows that transmission wheeling-related revenues increased $4.1 million.
This was partly due to a 20% increase in wheeling volumes as well as a 10% increase in Idaho Power's open access transmission tariff rate last October to reflect higher transmission costs.
Next on the table, other operating and maintenance expenses decreased by $4.2 million.
Finally, our higher pre-tax earnings led to an increase in income tax expense of $1.5 million this quarter.
The changes collectively resulted in an increase to Idaho Power's net income of $7.6 million.
IDACORP's operating cash flows along with our liquidity positions as of the end of March are included on Slide 10.
Cash flows from operations were about $50 million higher than last year's first quarter.
The liquidity available under IDACORP's and Idaho Power's credit facilities is shown on the middle of Slide 10.
Slide 11 shows our affirmed full year 2021 earnings guidance and our current year financial and operating metrics estimates.
We continue to expect IDACORP's 2021 earnings to be in the range of $4.60 to $4.80 per diluted share as we assume normal weather and operating conditions for the remaining nine months of the year.
Our expected full year O&M expense guidance remains in the range of the $345 million to $355 million, so we're off to a good start.
We also affirm our capital expenditures forecast for this year, which we increased a bit in February to the range of $320 million to $330 million.
Our expectation of hydro generation has softened somewhat given the conditions Lisa presented earlier and is now expected to be in the range of 5.5 million to 7.5 million megawatt hours.
