As I I've mentioned previously, we decided on Friday, March 13th of this year to have our more than 5000 employees from eighty five offices in 50 countries to work from home starting the following Monday.
Holding close to 15000 zoo meetings per month in January will be for everyone work from home.
That's an increase of 13 percent sequentially.
And lastly, we generated two hundred and forty six million dollars of cash flow from operations during the quarter, which, combined with the proceeds from the multiservice sale, enabled us to reduce our gross debt balance by approximately five hundred and seventy million dollars, further increasing our available liquidity and putting us in a net cash position for the first time in nearly 10 years.
While statistics indicate that commercial passenger activity in the US is slowly improving, down 95 percent in April compared to sixty three percent in recent weeks relative to the same prior year periods.
That's a decrease of 30 percent compared to the third quarter of twenty nineteen, but flat sequentially.
The Marine segment generated third quarter, third quarter gross profit of thirty two million dollars, that's a decline of 40 percent year over year and 14 percent sequentially.
Our last segment delivered a gross profit of eighty four million dollars in the third quarter, that's down 12 percent year over year, but effectively flat sequentially gross profit in the last segment was slightly better than expected during the quarter, with volumes returning to over 90 percent of prior year levels.
Third quarter Landreaux profits still included 19 million dollars of gross profit from multiservice, which again was sold on the last day of the third quarter.
We are also proud of the flawless execution of his investiture of multiservice amid the pandemic, which resulted in an 80 million dollar pre-tax gain.
Despite our diligence and focus in the fact of our accounts receivable, balance is just over 40 percent of 2010 levels with the risk profile of our overall portfolio, clearly improving risk remains elevated when compared to historical norms.
Third quarter interest expense was nine dollars million, which is down more than 50 percent year over year, our total interest expense continues to benefit from lower average borrowings and significantly lower interest rates.
Our adjusted effective tax rate was 32 percent in the third quarter, up from 30 percent in the third quarter of 2019.
Our accounts receivable balance declined to approximately one point twenty five billion dollars at the end of the third quarter, down more than 50 percent, or approximately one point six billion dollars from the year end, driven principally by volume declines and lower fuel prices.
