We'll begin on slide 3.
Turning to slide 4; we've established a strong track record of enhancing profitability.
This quarter, delivering an 84% improvement in adjusted EBITDA.
On slide 5; we saw two distinct patterns driving demand, as a result of the pandemic.
Turning to slide 6; second quarter results show that our transformation is working.
Importantly, North America returns to profitability and generated $4.8 million in operating income in an unprecedentedly tough market.
Turning to slide 8; reported net sales decreased 16.8% and constant currency net sales decreased 12.9%, primarily driven by growth in respiratory and more than offset by declines in Mobility and Seating and non-bed lifestyle products.
Gross profit increased 130 basis points to 28.9%, primarily due to favorable product mix and lower material and freight costs, partially offset by unfavorable foreign exchange.
Constant currency SG&A decreased 13.2% or $8.8 million, driven by reduced employment costs and lower commercial expenses.
Operating loss improved by $2.3 million, driven by reduced SG&A expenses, partially offset by lower net sales and higher restructuring costs.
Adjusted EBITDA was $6.6 million, up nearly 84% driven by reduced SG&A expense and improved gross profit as a percentage of sales.
The company's free cash flow usage was $1.9 million, an increase of $2.1 million, due to higher capital expenditures.
Turning to slide 9; as Matt discussed, consolidated net sales declined due to public health restrictions that limited access to healthcare professionals and elective care, with the greatest impact on Mobility and Seating.
Turning to slide 10; during the second quarter, net sales were negatively impacted by strict quarantine measures in the company's key European markets, primarily, the U.K., France and Germany.
As a result, reported net sales in Europe decreased 24%, and constant currency net sales decreased 20.7%, driven by declines in sales in Mobility and Seating and non-bed lifestyle product.
Gross profit decreased 90 basis points, driven by unfavorable product mix.
Operating income decreased $3.3 million, due to reduced gross profit from the lower net sales and unfavorable foreign exchange, partially offset by reduced SG&A expenses and a gain recognized on the sale of a German facility.
Moving to slide 11, the company was not as impactful -- I'm sorry the pandemic was not as impactful in North America, as compared to Europe, as the U.S. was never fully shut down.
Reported net sales decreased 3.3% and constant currency net sales decreased 3%, with growth in respiratory products more than offset by declines in Mobility and Seating and non-bed lifestyle products.
Within Mobility and Seating, higher value power mobility products were resilient, only experiencing a slight decline of 1%.
Gross profit increased 230 basis points or $2.4 million, driven by favorable product mix and lower operational cost, including reduced material and freight costs as a result of previous transformation initiatives.
The North America segment returned to profitability, with operating income of $4.8 million, an improvement of $6.1 million driven primarily by lower SG&A expenses primarily in employment costs and the benefit of reduced operational costs.
Turning to slide 12; All Other, which comprises the sales in the Asia-Pacific region, increased by 8.1% on a constant currency basis, driven by higher sales of lifestyle and Mobility and Seating products.
Operating loss increased by $300,000, driven by higher corporate SG&A expense, primarily related to equity compensation, partially offset by improved operating income in the Asia-Pacific business, attributable to lower SG&A expense.
Moving to slide 13; as of June 30, 2020, the company had total debt of $319 million, excluding operating lease obligations of $15.9 million, capitalized on the balance sheet.
At the end of the quarter, the company had approximately $104 million of cash on its balance sheet.
On slide 14, we are reintroducing new full-year guidance for 2020.
Based on the loosening of public health restrictions and renewed access to healthcare facilities, the company anticipates reported net sales in the range of $810 million to $840 million.
Adjusted EBITDA, similar to the prior year in the range of $20 million to $30 million, and free cash flow usage, in line with the prior year in the range of $7 million to $10 million.
