We were able to take advantage of selling 100% of our volume through our digital marketplaces.
We saw declines in the volumes sold from our 74 North American facilities and in our international operations.
First, we're able to increase gross profit as a percentage of revenue to 44.5% of gross revenue, that's up 300 basis points from last year.
Gross profit was 52% of net revenue compared to 47% the prior year.
TradeRev volumes were up 22% in the third quarter with each month showing an improved growth rate.
Our September growth rate on TradeRev was just over 30%.
Many of our investors have questioned the purchase price of $425 million.
As we analyzed the digital dealer-to-dealer marketplace, we believe that over the next several years, we may see our addressable market grow from the typical 5 million dealer-to-dealer transactions served by the wholesale auction industry historically, to as much as 15 million vehicles going forward.
As we size the opportunity for KAR, we believe the acquisition of BacklotCars could increase our annual adjusted EBITDA by over $100 million per year within the next four years.
We believe that the ultimate opportunity in the dealer-to-dealer space is even greater than that over the next 10 years.
In fact, TradeRev is now selling more dealer-to-dealer vehicles than ADESA in Canada, where KAR's businesses account for over 70% of all wholesale transactions.
We expect repo volumes in our industry to be up 30% to 40% in 2020.
About 10 years ago, following the great recession, we saw the same situation.
A major difference from 10 years ago to today is the health of the new car production and new car sales.
New car production plummeted in 2009 and did not recover until after 2013.
We have over $1.2 billion in cash.
Our net leverage is down to 1.6 times.
We have stabilized our leverage position and expect to repurchase KAR stock under our existing $300 million share repurchase authorization.
The cash purchase price is less than $30 million.
Over the past 10 plus years, the reporting of KAR's results has become increasingly complex and we have provided a myriad of metrics to assist investors understanding the various components of our business.
After funding the BacklotCars transaction in the next couple of weeks, we will still have about $800 million of available cash and an undrawn revolver.
