So recapping the quarter 4 performance around the world, starting with Asia Pacific.
In India, initiatives to build omnichannel presence and marketing campaigns around key occasions by leveraging festivals and passion points through occasion-led marketing and integrated execution drove a sequential increase in market share and nearly 30% growth in transactions for the quarter.
Additionally, our local Thums Up brand became $1 billion brand in India, driven by focused marketing and execution plans.
Turkey, one of our key markets, grew 7 points of value share for the year in digital as total digital commerce expanded by close to 90%.
In China, the Costa ready-to-drink expansion continued with availability now in more than 300,000 outlets, continuing to drive our share position ahead of our key competitor.
Revenue per launch and gross profit per launch were up 30% and 25%, respectively, versus prior year.
Additionally, to complement our World Without Waste goals, we announced a new global goal to reach 25% reusable packaging by 2030.
Our Q4 organic revenue growth was 9%.
Our price/mix of 10% was driven by a combination of factors, including targeted pricing, revenue growth management initiatives, as well as further improvement in away-from-home channels in many markets.
Unit case growth showed further sequential improvement on a two-year basis, and concentrate sales lagged unit cases by 10 points in the quarter, primarily due to six fewer days in the quarter.
This increase in marketing investments, along with some top-line pressure from six fewer days in the quarter, resulted in comparable operating margin compression of approximately 500 basis points for the quarter.
For the full year, comparable operating margin was down approximately 100 basis points versus prior year as improved comparable gross margin was offset by the significant step-up in marketing.
Importantly, versus 2019, a key measure we have focused on, comparable operating margin was up approximately 100 basis points.
Fourth quarter comparable earnings per share of $0.45 was a decline of 5% year over year, resulting in full year comparable earnings per share of $2.32, an increase of 19% versus the prior year, as the strong resurgence in the business also benefited from a 3-point tailwind from currency and tax.
We delivered strong free cash flow of $11.3 billion in 2021, with free cash flow conversion of approximately 115% and a dividend payout ratio well below our long-term target of 75%.
We expect organic revenue growth of approximately 7% to 8%, and we expect comparable currency-neutral earnings-per-share growth of 8% to 10% versus 2021.
Based on current rates and our hedge positions, we anticipate an approximate 3-point currency headwind to comparable revenue and an approximate 3 to 4 points currency headwind to comparable earnings per share for full year 2022.
Additionally, due to a certain change in recent regulations, we estimate an effective tax rate increase from 18.6% in 2021 to 20% for 2022, which is an estimated 2 percentage points headwind to earnings per share.
Therefore, all in, we expect comparable earnings-per-share growth of 5% to 6% versus 2021, including the combined 5- to 6-point headwind from currency and tax.
We expect to generate approximately $10.5 billion of free cash flow over 2022 through approximately $12 billion in cash from operations, less approximately $1.5 billion in capital investments.
This implies the fourth consecutive year of free cash flow conversion above our long-term range of 90% to 95%.
