Today, almost to the day, marks the 10-year anniversary of Kosmos's IPO on the New York Stock Exchange.
So I want to start the call with a look back at how far the company has come over those 10 years and also look forward to where we expect the company to head over the next decade.
Starting on Slide 2.
Oil prices averaged $111 per barrel that year, and consensus was there wasn't enough supply to meet growing future oil demand.
Full-year production in 2011 was just 16,000 barrels of oil per day, and Kosmos had net 2P reserves around 70 million barrels, almost all of which was oil.
Over the last 10 years, Kosmos has successfully transformed from a frontier oil explorer to a full-cycle E&P.
We brought online the 10 fields in Ghana, discovered multiple giant gas fields in Mauritania and Senegal, and have since taken FID on Phase 1 of the Tortue LNG project.
In recent years, we have increased our commitment to the environment, integrating the impact of climate change into our strategic business decisions, shaping our portfolio to be fit and relevant for the future, and setting a goal of carbon neutrality in our Scope 1 and Scope 2 emissions by 2030 or sooner.
We've created a strong platform, which we believe will allow us to successfully navigate the next 10 years with defined high-quality projects in our current portfolio to further grow and diversify production.
Over the next several years, we believe we have line of sight to grow organic production to around 100,000 barrels of oil equivalent with potential options to supplement that further with compelling value-enhancing inorganic opportunities.
In 2023, we expect first gas from Tortue Phase 1 with the second phase planned to come online in the middle of this decade.
All credible scenarios by leading analysts from economists to financial advisors to scientists have modeled a pathway to 2050 with a significant proportion of natural gas in the energy supply mix.
This consistent agenda to tackle climate as part of our broader commitment to advancing our ESG responsibilities has been a major part of Kosmos's business over the last 10 years.
With a portfolio of advantaged assets, we expect to remain well-positioned to further drive that agenda over the next 10 years.
Turning to Slide 3.
On development, Phase 1 of the Tortue LNG project is continuing to advance, with 58% complete at the end of the first quarter.
Having started the year strongly, we remain on track for the full year to deliver between $100 million and $200 million of free cash flow from the base business at $55 per barrel Brent.
Slide 4 looks at the ramp-up in activity across our three production hubs in more detail.
FPSO uptime in 1Q was 98% at Jubilee and 99% at TEN carrying on the momentum for the second half of 2020.
Gas offtake of approximately 110 million standard cubic feet per day from Jubilee and TEN is around double the 2019 level, and there is scope for this to increase further.
The rig has now moved to drill a water injection well at Jubilee, after which it's expected to complete both wells increasing Jubilee production by an estimated 15,000 to 20,000 barrels of oil per day gross, which should continue to drive our production higher.
In April, we completed the first of three ESPs for 2020, one, an upgraded of the G-19 flowline, which has significantly enhanced production from that well.
In the U.S., Gulf of Mexico, Kodiak-2 was brought back online late in 1Q after a successful remediation of the subsea infrastructure issue identified in the fourth quarter of 2020.
The Kodiak-3 well came online last month, and we plan to drill the Tornado-5 infill well this quarter with production expected in 3Q.
Kosmos delivered approximately 53,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day for the first quarter, in line with guidance, and our production activities remain on track to the year-end exit rate of 60,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day.
Turning to Slide 5.
Tortue Phase 1 ended the first quarter around 58% complete with strong progress across all of the major workstreams, which can be seen on the images on the slide.
Overall, we're making good progress and Phase 1 is expected to be around 80% complete at year-end.
Turning to Slide 6.
The Winterfell discovery derisks more than 100 million barrels of gross resource potential across Kosmos's acreage position across multiple fault blocks and reservoir section.
Turning to Slide 7, which looks at Zora, our next potential ILX hub.
Kosmos will operate the well with a planned working interest of 37.5%.
We believe that our successful Zora well will lower the risk of these nearby opportunities, thus providing the potential to create a new production hub with around 200 million barrels of gross resource potential in total.
With that, I'll hand over to Neal to take you through the financials on Slide 8.
Slide 8 shows the financial results for the quarter, which were in line with our previous guidance.
We only lifted 1.5 out of 12.5 cargoes expected in 2021 in the first quarter.
Turning now to Slide 9.
In late February, we successfully completed a $450 million senior notes offering to reduce outstanding balances on the credit facilities and for working capital.
The facility maturity was pushed out two years with final maturity now in 2027.
And we agreed a borrowing base with the banks of $1.24 billion, with $1 billion currently drawn on the facility.
We have reduced the facility size from $1.25 billion -- to $1.25 billion from $1.5 billion to reduce our liquidity reliance on the RBL facility as planned.
At the end of the first quarter, the company had approximately $0.8 billion of liquidity.
We are forecasting 4.5 cargoes in the second quarter from Ghana and Equatorial Guinea, which is three times higher than the 1.5 cargoes from the two production hubs in the first quarter.
With that, I'll hand back to Andy to wrap up on Slide 10.
Tortue Phase 1 remains on track to be around 80% complete by year-end with the FPSO sale and leaseback expected to close this quarter.
With all of that, we're firmly on track to hit our year-end exit production rate target of 60,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day, remain on track to generate $100 million to $200 million of free cash flow from the base business at $55 per barrel Brent.
