These statements, including those describing our beliefs, goals, expectations, forecast and assumptions are intended to be covered by the Safe Harbor provisions of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
With the closing of the Sabalo acquisition on July 1st, a little over a year and a half, we've acquired more than 37,000 net acres of oil-weighted leasehold and have completely transitioned our development activity over to that leasehold.
We are basin leader in establishing a sand mine on our company-owned surface, which also mitigated substantial portion of the cost pressure, and we estimate it saves us approximately $200,000 per well in the current environment.
During the second quarter, we completed 16 wells all in Howard County.
13 of these wells were Davis well package.
In the first two well packages in Central Howard, we targeted spacing equivalent to 12 wells in the Wolfcamp A and four wells in the lower Sprayberry.
In the Davis package, we widened the spacing to 10 wells in the Wolfcamp A and four wells in the lower Sprayberry.
These well counts have been included in our gross location count since first quarter and we do not expect any changes to the gross locations shown on Slide 5.
On Slide 5, you will also see the Davis cumulative production relative to the first two more tightly spaced packages, which are the Gilbert/Passowt and the Trentino/Whitmire packages.
While still early in its flowback, the Davis package is responding exactly how we would expect with wider spacing and is outperforming the tighter space packages by an average of 19%.
In the Sabalo area, which we are now calling North Howard, our initial development plan will still be based on 12 wells per section, but will differ somewhat from the Central Howard 12-well development plan, reflecting the strength of the lower Sprayberry as you move North and West in Howard County.
Again, we plan to stay with the wider spacing at a total of 12 wells per DSU, that was six wells in the lower Spraberry and six wells in the Wolfcamp A in the North Howard acreage position.
The Vince Everett package was actually drilled on a slightly tighter spacing than the 12 wells per DSU.
In the chart on the bottom of Slide 6, you can see the increase in completed wells being put on flowback in the second half of 2021 with this increase in activity.
The additional wells are key to driving the oil production growth in the third and fourth quarters of this year and building momentum into 2022, as you can see in the top chart on Slide 6.
In the first half of 2021, we continue to drive down drilling and completions costs and delivered our wells at an average cost of $525 per foot.
As shown on Slide 9, our drilling and completions operations continued their strong trend of getting more and more efficient through the second quarter.
At current market prices, we estimate that our sand mine is now saving us more than $200,000 per well.
These efficiencies also allowed us to deliver three additional wells in the second quarter for a total of 16 wells.
Lastly, turning to Slide 11, I'd like to point out our flaring and venting statistics for the first half of 2021.
Flowback dates being 10 days faster or 10 days slower can have a substantial impact on the quarter with no real impact to value.
Moving into 2022, at our moderated activity levels, we expect to hold oil production relatively flat at a normalized rate of 36,000 barrels per day to 38,000 barrels per day.
Again quarter-on-quarter, will have variations as we have demonstrated through the capital spend graph on Slide 6.
We continue to make progress deleveraging and improving our capital structure with the Sabalo and Sixth Street transactions concluding our previously announced $75 million ATM program and the $400 million bond offering and credit facility extension.
A $400 million bond transaction and related credit facility extension provide us with much greater liquidity preserving the balance sheet around future opportunities.
As part of this credit facility extension and bond offering, we maintain the commitment level of $725 million and our credit rating saw a one notch improvement from Moody's.
With the recent acquisition and our hedging program, we have enhanced the free cash flow generation profile of the company for the next 18 months.
Currently, we are approximately 80% hedged for oil for the remainder of 2021 and 70% for '22.
We are approximately 93% hedged on natural gas in '21 and 51% in '22.
And for NGLs, we are approximately 72% hedged for the remainder of '21 and approximately 49% hedged for 2022.
