The most significant risk factors that could affect our future results are described in our annual report on Form 10-K.
Full fiscal year consolidated sales grew to $1.7 billion and consolidated GAAP operating margin increased to 7.9%.
Non-GAAP operating margin reached 9%, the highest margin level achieved in recent history.
Over the year, we generated $310 million in cash from operations and returned $61 million to shareholders through share repurchases and dividends; truly outstanding results, particularly considering the challenges of the fiscal year.
For the quarter, record sales of $519 million led to all-time record profits, driven by increased production capacity, excellent performance by our company-owned La-Z-Boy Furniture Galleries and continued profit growth at Joybird.
Additionally, our cash generation enabled us to return $50 million to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases in the quarter.
Across the La-Z-Boy Furniture Galleries network, written same-store sales doubled, increasing 100% in the quarter versus a year ago.
And to provide some additional context, written same-store sales for the quarter increased 29% compared with our pre-COVID fiscal 2019 fourth quarter for a compound annual growth rate of about 14% over the two years.
Starting with our Wholesale segment, which includes our upholstery and casegoods companies as well as our international business, delivered sales for the quarter grew 40% to $384 million compared with prior year quarter, which was impacted by COVID-related shutdowns.
Sequentially, sales increased 9.5% from fiscal '21's third quarter as we continued to increase production capacity.
Non-GAAP operating margin for the Wholesale segment was a healthy 10.2%.
Also, last year's fourth quarter benefited from a one-time $16 million rebate of previously paid tariffs, partially offset by higher bad debt expense.
For perspective, today, our backlog is about 8 times higher than in pre-COVID and 16 times higher than at the end of last fiscal year.
Input materials such as foam, steel and plywood are up 2 to 4 times their pre-pandemic prices.
For the quarter, delivered sales increased 39% to a record $194 million and delivered same-store sales increased 35% versus year ago, on strong execution by the team.
Non-GAAP operating margin increased to 12.2% from 10.8% in last year's comparable quarter, primarily driven by fixed cost leverage on higher delivered sales volume.
Written same-store sales for the company-owned La-Z-Boy Furniture Galleries stores more than doubled, increasing 114% in the quarter, reflecting positive trends across all sales metrics, including traffic, conversion and average ticket.
For perspective, against the fiscal 2019 fourth quarter when we were in a pre-COVID environment, written same-store sales increased 40%.
That's about an 18% compound average growth rate over the two years, which again demonstrates the strength of our business and brand in the marketplace and that consumers feel safe shopping in our stores.
For fiscal '22, approximately 30 projects, including new stores, remodels and relocations, will be completed across the network, with two-thirds of the projects within our company-owned portfolio.
Delivered sales for the period, which are reported in Corporate and Other, more than doubled, increasing 144% to $38 million, reflecting strong end-to-end execution.
Written sales increased 125% in the quarter versus the prior year period, reflecting ongoing strong order trends and the strength of the brand in the online marketplace.
For the full fiscal 2021 year, non-GAAP results exclude purchase accounting charges totaling $17 million pre-tax or $0.33 per diluted share, primarily due to a write-up for the Joybird contingent consideration liability based on forecast performance.
Two, a change of $3.8 million pre-tax or $0.07 per diluted share related to the company's business realignment initiative announced in June of 2020.
And finally, income of $5.2 million pre-tax or $0.08 per diluted share for employee retention payroll tax credits the company qualified for under the CARES Act.
On a consolidated basis, fiscal '21 fourth quarter sales increased 41% to a record $519 million, reflecting strong demand and a comparison to the fiscal '20 fourth quarter, which was impacted by COVID-related plant and retail closures.
Consolidated non-GAAP operating income increased to $52 million.
And consolidated non-GAAP operating margin improved to 10% versus 9.3%.
Non-GAAP earnings per share was $0.87 per diluted share in the current year versus $0.49 in last year's fourth quarter.
Sales increased 1.8% to $1.7 billion, a strong result given the slow start to the fiscal year, with many retailers closed, including most of our company-owned La-Z-Boy Furniture Galleries and our plants just restarting production at limited capacity.
For the year, consolidated non-GAAP operating income increased to $157 million and consolidated non-GAAP operating margin reached 9%, an all-time high in recent history.
Non-GAAP earnings per share increased to $2.62 per diluted share versus $2.16 in fiscal 2020.
Consolidated gross margin for the full fiscal '21 year increased 10 basis points versus the prior year.
It's important to note that last year's gross margin was positively impacted by rebates on previously paid tariffs, which provided 100 basis point benefit to gross margin.
SG&A as a percentage of sales decreased 70 basis points for fiscal '21 versus fiscal '20, primarily reflecting cost reduction initiatives taken throughout the year, including lower marketing and advertising spend given strong demand trends.
Our effective tax rate on a GAAP basis for fiscal '21 was 26.3% versus 31.4% in fiscal '20.
Impacting our effective tax rate for fiscal '20 was a net tax expense of $4 million, primarily from the tax effect of a non-deductible goodwill impairment charge related to Joybird and tax expense of $1.3 million from deferred tax attributable to undistributed foreign earnings no longer permanently reinvested.
Absent discrete adjustments, the effective tax rate in fiscal '20 would have been 26.4%.
For the year, we generated $310 million in cash from operating activities, reflecting strong operating performance and a $140 million increase in customer deposits from written orders for the company's Retail segment and Joybird.
We ended the period with $395 million in cash and no debt, up from $264 million in cash at the end of fiscal '20 and $75 million drawn on our credit facility.
In addition, we held $32 million in investments to enhance returns on cash compared with $29 million last year.
During the year, we invested $38 million in capital, primarily related to machinery and equipment, improvements to select retail stores, cost for new production capacity in Mexico and upgrades to our Dayton, Tennessee manufacturing facility, which have now been completed.
Regarding cash return to shareholders, for the year, we paid $16.5 million in dividends to shareholders and spent approximately $44 million, purchasing 1.1 million shares of stock in the open market under our existing authorized share repurchase program.
This leaves $3.4 million -- 3.4 million shares of purchase availability in this program.
We expect our non-GAAP adjustments for fiscal '22 will include purchase accounting adjustments for previous acquisitions estimated to be at $0.01 to $0.03 per diluted share.
However, as usual, the first quarter is limited to 12 weeks of production and shipments to enable our shutdown week in July for maintenance for most of the company's plants compared to the usual 13 weeks of production shipments in quarters two and four.
The full impact of these factors may result in a temporary impact to profit, which could be in the range of 300 basis points in the first two quarters compared to our very strong Q4 levels, but still in line with or above our historical levels for the summer months.
Finally, as we make investments in the business to strengthen the company for the future, we expect capital expenditures to be in the range of $55 million to $65 million for fiscal 2022.
