The most significant risk factors that could affect our future results are described in our annual report on Form 10-K.
Across the La-Z-Boy enterprise, we delivered all-time record high sales of $576 million with sales 29% ahead of the pre-pandemic fiscal '20 second quarter.
We are poised to grow on this base of nearly $2.1 billion in trailing 12 month sales.
At the time, written same-store sales for the La-Z-Boy Furniture Galleries network were unusually strong, up 34%.
Off that base, written same-store sales for the La-Z-Boy Furniture Galleries network decreased 6% in the fiscal '22 second quarter.
However, comparing this quarter to the pre-pandemic fiscal '20 second quarter written same-store sales for the La-Z-Boy Furniture Galleries network increased an impressive 26% for a compounded annual growth rate of 12% across the two years.
Similarly, while written same-store sales for our company-owned retail segment decreased 7% versus the unusual prior-year period written sales increased at a compounded annual growth rate of 12% across the last two years.
For Joybird, primarily an e-commerce business, it continued its strong growth trajectory accelerating to rate 56% more business this Q2 than in last year's second quarter and delivering an extremely impressive compounded annual growth rate of 40% across the last two years.
We're continuing to add manufacturing cells and now employ almost 40% more manufacturing personnel in pre-pandemic.
Furnico has been manufacturing La-Z-Boy product for sale in the UK and Ireland since 2008.
Also during the quarter, we continued to return value to shareholders with a dividend payment and $15 million in share repurchases, bringing our total cash returned to shareholders in the first half of the year to $64 million across dividends and share repurchase.
And finally, we were pleased to announce last month, the expansion of our Board of Directors to 12 members with the addition of Erika Alexander, who serves as the Chief Global Officer, Global Operations for Marriott International.
Importantly, as we manage the current operational challenges across the business, we're also addressing the long term with our work on Century Vision, our winning strategy for growth through our Centennial anniversary in 2027 and beyond.
At the same time throughout the course of Century Vision will expand the vibrant La-Z-Boy Furniture Galleries store base to approximately 400 locations across North America and will strengthen the entire network to remodels and relocations with some 30 projects on tap for this fiscal year.
On a consolidated basis, fiscal '22 second quarter sales increased 25% to a record $576 million versus the prior year quarter, an increase sequentially from the fiscal '22 first quarter reflecting continued strong demand and ongoing capacity increases as well as the effects of pricing and surcharges.
Compared with the pre-pandemic fiscal '20 second quarter, sales were 29% higher for a compounded annual growth rate of about 14% over the last two years.
Consolidated GAAP operating income increased $54 million versus the prior year period and non-GAAP operating income increased to $52 million.
Consolidated GAAP operating margin was 9.4% and non-GAAP operating margin was 9% up sequentially from the first quarter.
GAAP diluted earnings per share was $0.89 for the fiscal '22 second quarter versus $0.75 in the prior year quarter.
Non-GAAP diluted earnings per share was $0.85 in the current year quarter versus $0.82 in last year's quarter.
Starting with our wholesale segment, delivered sales for the quarter grew 28% to $439 million compared with the prior year period and increased 12% sequentially from Q1.
Compared with the pre-pandemic fiscal '20 second quarter, sales were 25% higher for a compounded annual growth rate of 12%.
Non-GAAP operating margin for the wholesale segment was 9.1% versus 12.2% in last year's second quarter, primarily reflecting higher raw material and freight costs, start-up costs for new facilities and labor challenges, partially offset by pricing and surcharges, fixed cost leverage on higher volume and lower marketing spend as a percentage of sales.
All in, we were pleased with the results and the progress we made sequentially from the first quarter operating margin of 4.7%.
For the quarter, delivered sales increased 19% to $192 million.
Delivered same-store sales increased 17% versus the year-ago quarter.
Compared with the pre-pandemic fiscal '20 second quarter, delivered sales increased 30% for a compounded annual growth rate of 14%, again demonstrating the strength of the La-Z-Boy brand and our furniture gallery store system in this environment as well as ongoing strong execution at the store level with sales metrics positive across the board.
Non-GAAP operating margin increased to a second quarter record of 12.5% versus 9.4% in the prior year quarter, driven primarily by fixed cost leverage on the higher delivered sales volume as well as expense management.
Sales for Joybird which are reported in corporate and other increased 37% to $40 million versus the prior year quarter.
On a two-year basis, compared with a -- the pre-pandemic fiscal '20 second quarter delivered sales increased in impressive 93% for a compounded annual growth rate of 39%, reflecting the momentum Joybird is building and the direct to consumer marketplace as we continue to acquire customers and strengthen brand awareness through new digital marketing channels.
Pulling all of this together, consolidated non-GAAP gross margin for the entire Company for the fiscal '22 second quarter decreased 500 basis points versus the prior year quarter, primarily driven by significant increases in raw material and freight costs, start-up costs associated with the expansion of our manufacturing capacity and labor challenges in our wholesale businesses.
Consolidated non-GAAP SG&A as a percentage of sales for the quarter decreased 280 basis points, primarily reflecting fixed cost leverage on the higher sales volume, mainly in our retail segment as well as lower marketing spend as a percentage of sales.
Our effective tax rate on a GAAP basis for the fiscal '22 second quarter was 26.6% versus 26% in the second quarter of fiscal '21.
Our effective tax rate varies from the 21% federal statutory rate, primarily due to state taxes.
We expect our effective tax rate for the full fiscal '22 year to be between 25.5% and 26.5%.
Year-to-date, we generated $15 million in cash from operating activities.
We ended the period with $297 million in cash and no debt and held $31 million in investments to enhance returns on cash.
Year-to-date, we invested $59 million and higher inventory levels to protect against supply chain disruptions and support increased production and delivered sales.
We also spent $33 million in capital year-to-date, primarily related to improvements to our retail stores, plant upgrades at our manufacturing distribution facilities, new upholstery manufacturing capacity in Mexico and technology upgrades.
As a note, last month we entered into a new five-year $200 million unsecured revolving credit facility which replaced our $150 million ABL facility.
The new facility has a $100 million accordion feature, allowing us to expand our borrowing capacity to support future growth.
Regarding cash returned to shareholders, during the quarter, we continued to buy back shares, spending $15 million repurchasing more than 400,000 shares of stock in the open market leaving 8.6 million shares in our existing authorized share repurchase program.
Year-to-date we have returned $51 million to shareholders via share repurchase.
We also paid $6.6 million in dividends to shareholders in the second quarter.
And subsequent to quarter end, demonstrating its confidence in the Company's long-term growth prospects, the Board of Directors increased the regular quarterly dividend by 10% to $0.165 per share.
Quarterly trends will also be impacted by our third and fourth quarters containing 12 and 14 production weeks respectively compared to 13 production weeks in our second quarter.
Recall fiscal 2022 will include 53 weeks of results.
Finally, as we make investments in the business to strengthen the Company for the future, including work related to our Century Vision strategy, we expect capital expenditures to be in the range of $75 million to $85 million for fiscal '22.
