As you know, our negative EBITDA has been gradually improving each quarter since bottoming out during the second quarter last year at negative $30 million.
We took a really big step forward during the second quarter this year, improving our negative adjusted EBITDA of over $17 million during the fiscal 2021 first quarter, improving from that number and coming in at just over $1 million of breaking even on this very important metric during the second quarter.
It's very important to note, however, that our fiscal 2021 second quarter and first half interest expense included approximately $600,000 during the second quarter and $1.2 million during the first half of noncash amortization of debt issuance costs compared to only about $100,00 million to $150,000 of such costs during last year's comparable periods.
Our total cash capital expenditures during the first half of fiscal 2021 totaled approximately $6 million.
Our average admission price at our comparable theaters has now increased 7% during the first half of fiscal 2021 compared to last year.
Meanwhile, our average concession in food and beverage revenues per person at our comparable theaters increased by 17.2% for the first half of the year.
When you compare our second quarter and first half admission revenues to fiscal 2019, we calculate that our admission revenues were down 70% during the second quarter and nearly 75% for the first half of fiscal 2021, both compared to 2019.
Now according to data received from Comscore and compiled by us to evaluate our fiscal 2021 second quarter and first half results, United States box office results decreased 73.9% during the fiscal 2021 second quarter and 80% during our fiscal 2021 first half, both compared to U.S. box office receipts during fiscal 2019.
Our RevPAR for our seven comparable owned hotels decreased approximately 42% during the second quarter and 47% during the first half compared to the same period during fiscal 2019.
Breaking out those second quarter numbers for the seven comparable hotels more specifically, our overall RevPAR decreased during the fiscal 2021 second quarter compared to fiscal 2019, again pre-pandemic, was due to an overall occupancy rate decrease of approximately 27 percentage points and an 11.8% decrease in our average daily rate, or ADR. Our average second quarter occupancy rate for our owned hotels was approximately 49%, with lighter midweek business partially offsetting quite strong weekend occupancies at most of our hotels.
We anticipate an income tax refund of approximately $24 million in the second half of the year, along with tax loss carryforwards that may be used in future periods.
We also successfully monetized two life insurance assets early in our fiscal 2021 third quarter totaling over $18 million and anticipated sales proceeds from real estate sales in the upcoming quarters as well, further increasing our liquidity and strengthening our balance sheet.
We have over $10 million of carrying value in assets currently under contract or letter of intent to sell later in 2021.
Early in our third quarter we amended our revolving credit agreement and made an early payment on our term loan facility, reducing the balance of our short term borrowings from approximately $84 million to $50 million and extending the maturity date of this remaining term loan facility to September of 2022.
We reported negative adjusted EBITDA of $30 million in the second quarter.
And while an overall occupancy rate of approximately 50% during the second quarter is certainly below where we were in 2019, I can honestly say that our performance in this division has surprised us to the positive each and every month so far this year.
Looking to future periods, our group room revenue bookings for the remainder of fiscal 2021 and into fiscal 2022, commonly referred to in the hotels and resorts industry as group pace, is currently running approximately 20% behind where we would historically be at this time in prior years.
With two other hotels in the big 10 cities of Madison, Wisconsin and Lincoln, Nebraska, we think we're a great fit for this property.
We started the quarter off with 74% of our theaters open as we waited for more new films to be released.
As we noted in our release, we currently have 97% of our theaters open again, almost all of which are operating seven days a week with normal operating hours.
And week in and week out we believe we've been one of the top performing theater circuits in the U.S. compared to the top 10 circuits that we track on a regular basis.
Additional data received and compiled by us from Comscore indicates our admission revenues during the second quarter and first half of fiscal 2021 represented approximately 3.4% and 3.7%, respectively of the total admission revenues in the U.S. during the same two periods.
This represents a material increase over our reported market share of approximately 3.2% during the comparable periods of fiscal 2019 prior to the pandemic.
In January of this year, our total theater division revenues were only 16% of our theater division revenues in January of 2019, prior to the pandemic.
Recent surveys by the National Association of Theater Owners have indicated that the percentage of those surveyed saying they're very or somewhat comfortable going to the movies right now has been hovering in the 70 plus percent range in recent weeks, with likely concerns over the Delta variant and new masking recommendations in some markets dropping that percentage down several points in recent weeks.
But the same percentage was about 47% at the beginning of the year.
This remarkably resilient business has navigated and adapted to change for the entire 85 years we've been in it.
