Even after adjusting for one non-recurring item in our fiscal 2021 first quarter, a one-time state government grant, our non-GAAP adjusted EBITDA, while still negative, was over $10 million better than our fiscal 2020 fourth quarter, a sign of real progress and that's despite the fact that our first quarter is historically a weaker quarter than our fourth quarter.
But our adjusted EBITDA from this division still improved by nearly $5 million compared to last quarter.
And our hotels and resorts division reported adjusted EBITDA that was $6 million better than last quarter, and in fact, was over $2 million better than last year.
It's important to note however that our fiscal 2021 first quarter interest expense included over $600,000 of non-cash amortization of debt issuance costs compared to only $49,000 of such costs last year.
We've now showed the entire $100.1 million of convertible notes as debt.
Our effective income tax rate was 27.7% during the quarter, and we anticipate that our effective income tax rate for the remaining quarters of fiscal 2021 will be or may be in that 24% to 26% range that we've typically seen.
Shifting gears away from the earnings statement just for a moment, our total cash capital expenditures during the first quarter of fiscal 2021 totaled approximately $1.5 million.
We're still estimating that our fiscal 2021 capital expenditures may be in the $15 million to $25 million range, with many of our projected expenditures back-loaded to the second half of the year.
Total attendance was down 81.4% compared to the prior year first quarter, reflecting the large number of theaters closed for all or portions of the quarter and the fact that our open theaters were only operating on Tuesdays and weekends.
Now according the data received from Comscore and compiled by us to evaluate our fiscal 2021 first quarter results, United States box office receipts decreased 89.7% during our fiscal 2021 first quarter.
As a result, we believe our admission revenues decline of 80.7% for comparable theaters during the first quarter of fiscal 2021 outperformed the industry average by 9 percentage points.
Our average admission price for our comparable theaters increased 3.7% during the first quarter and our average concession and food and beverage revenues per person at our comparable theaters increased 16% for the first quarter.
Shifting to our hotels and resorts division, our total revenue per available room or RevPAR for our eight owned hotels decreased 46.4% during the first quarter compared to last year's same period.
Once again, now comparing it to the industry, however, when you compare, according to data received from Smith Travel Research and compiled by us in order to compare our results, our hotels outperformed comparable upper upscale hotels throughout the United States during the first quarter by approximately 8 percentage points.
The data also indicates that our hotels outperformed competitive hotels in our market by approximately 6 points, 6 percentage points during the first quarter.
Breaking out the numbers for all eight hotels more specifically, our fiscal 2021 first quarter overall RevPAR decrease was due to an overall occupancy rate decrease of 25.9 percentage points, partially offset by a 2.6% increase in our average daily rate or ADR. Our average first quarter occupancy rate for our owned hotels was 28.3%, with several hotels performing much better than that.
You may recall that we reported cash and revolving credit availability of approximately $227 million at the end of December.
We also used proceeds from the previously mentioned sale of a joint venture to pay down our term loan by over $4 million during the quarter.
And now that we have filed our fiscal 2020 income tax return, we anticipate an additional income tax refund of approximately $24 million later in the year, along with tax loss carryforwards that may be used in future years.
We have over $8 million of carrying value in additional assets currently under contract or letters of intent to sell later in 2021.
We continue to believe we'll receive total sales proceeds from real estate sales during the next 12 to 18 months, totaling approximately $10 million to $40 million, depending on demand for the real estate in question.
The rollout of vaccinations has gone better than expected with over 50% of the eligible adult population having now received at least one shot, both nationwide and most importantly, in our markets.
We started the quarter off with only 52% of our theaters opened due to temporary restrictions put back in place in several of our markets in the fourth quarter.
As those restrictions were lifted, we began reopening theaters once again and as a result, we ended the first quarter with approximately 74% of our theaters open.
As Doug shared with you, based on industry data available to us, we believe we outperformed the industry by approximately 9 percentage points this quarter.
In fact, based upon the metric, we believe we were the top performing theater circuit during the first quarter of fiscal 2021 compared to the top 10 circuits in the US.
Additional data received and compiled by us from Comscore indicates our admission revenues during the first quarter of fiscal 2021 represented approximately 4.8% of the total admission revenues in the US during the period, commonly referred to as market share in our industry.
This represents an approximately 55% increase over our reported market share of approximately 3.1% during the first quarter of fiscal 2019 prior to the pandemic.
During the last 11 weeks of fiscal 2021 first quarter, we averaged over 1,500 MPC events per week, accounting for approximately 21% of our admission revenues during those weeks.
Recent surveys by the National Association of Theater Owners have indicated that approximately 65% of those surveyed said they are very or somewhat comfortable going to the movies right now, with the percentage climbing to the mid-80s when the participants indicate they are vaccinated.
This is up from around 47% at the beginning of the year, which is an exciting improvement in just a short period of time.
