Over the last 18 months, we've made significant changes to our operating model, moving to 20 focused operating units as well as making major enhancements to our culture and incentives.
About 60% of our businesses held or won share in the last calendar quarter.
While that's down slightly from last quarter due to some supply constraints and where certain businesses are in their product cycles, it is a significant improvement from where Medtronic was just 18 months ago.
In cardiac rhythm management, one of our largest businesses, we continue to build on our category leadership, adding over 1.5 points of share.
And we recently launched our Micra AV leadless pacemaker in Japan and Micra VR in China, resulting in international Micra growth of over 50% in Q3.
In Respiratory Interventions, despite the year-over-year headwind as ventilator sales continue to return to pre-pandemic levels, we estimate we gained about 400 basis points of share.
We won share in premium ventilation with our Puritan Bennett 980, in video laryngoscopes with our McGRATH MAC, and in core airways with our Taperguard endotracheal tubes.
And in Brain Modulation, while we continue to face headwinds from replacement devices, our business grew 15% on strong adoption of our Percept Neurostimulator with BrainSense technology, paired with our SenSight directional lead.
Medtronic is the only company with sensing capabilities on our deep brain stimulators, which drove about 10 points of new implant share and over a point of overall DBS share in Q3, and we expect this momentum to continue.
Our flow diversion launches in Japan, CE Mark countries, and the United States, coupled with broader portfolio growth in China, propelled neurovascular to 12% growth this quarter.
In our surgical innovations business, we lost a little over 0.5 points of share overall due to acute resin shortage that impacted our flagship LigaSure vessel sealing portfolio.
And in Europe, we continue to see success and strong adoption of our 780G with the Guardian 4 sensor.
We've launched over 200 products in the U.S., Western Europe, Japan, and China in the last 12 months, and these are having an impact across our businesses.
We believe Aurora will accelerate adoption of EV ICDs and make this a $1 billion market by 2030.
In cardiac ablation solutions, we're advancing a number of technologies to become a leader in the $8 billion EP ablation market.
In diabetes, our MiniMed 780G insulin pump, combined with our Guardian 4 sensor, continue to be under active review with the FDA, with approval subject to our warning letter.
Simplera is fully disposable, easy to apply and half the size of Guardian 4.
We believe that DPN market opportunity will reach $300 million by FY '26, and with an annual TAM of up to $1.8 billion, making DPN for SCS one of the biggest market opportunities in med tech.
With its designed best-in-class battery, constant current, and full-body MRI compatibility at both 1.5 and 3 Tesla, we expect this device will extend our category leadership in sacral neuromodulation.
Our third quarter organic revenue increased 2%.
Despite the challenging revenue, we controlled expenses and delivered adjusted earnings per share in line with our guidance and $0.01 ahead of consensus.
From a geographic perspective, our U.S. revenue was flat, and non-U.S. developed markets grew 1%, given the impacts of omicron.
Our emerging markets were relatively stronger, growing 7%, with strength in South Asia, Latin America and the Middle East, and Africa.
Our year-to-date free cash flow was $4.3 billion, up 23% from last year, and we continue to target a full year conversion of 80% or greater.
Since the beginning of last fiscal year, we've announced eight acquisitions totaling over $3.2 billion in total consideration, including last month's acquisition of Affera in our cardiac ablation business.
We have a commitment to return more than 50% of our free cash flow to our shareholders, primarily through our attractive and growing dividend.
And fiscal year to date, we paid over $2.5 billion in dividends to our shareholders.
Fiscal year to date, we've repurchased over $1.1 billion of our stock.
Assuming that holds, for the fourth quarter, we're comfortable with current Street consensus for our organic revenue growth of approximately 5.5%.
At recent foreign exchange rates, currency would be a headwind on fourth quarter revenue of approximately $185 million.
By segment, we would model cardiovascular at 7% to 8% growth, neuroscience at 2.5% to 3.5% growth, medical surgical at 7.5% to 8.5% growth, and diabetes down 6% to 7%, all on an organic basis.
On the bottom line, we expect fourth quarter non-GAAP diluted earnings per share in the range of $1.56 to $1.58, in line with current consensus.
While colorectal is one of the most preventable cancers, low screening rates make it one of the deadliest, with mortality rates 40% higher for the black population in the United States.
