We're very excited to discuss another major push forward in our accreted growth strategy, investing more than $3.6 billion year-to-date, and more than $7 billion at the beginning of 2020 and yet growth for the sake of growth is not consistent with the way we've built MPT.
Not only did MPT generate growth in FFO per share in excess of 20% last year, but we have grown both NFFO and AFFO per share well in excess of 10% year-over-year in the first half of 2021.
This is the strategy we put in place more than 18 years ago, and we have not deviated from it.
In the 10-year period ending the first quarter of this year, our normalized FFO per share grew at an annualized rate approaching 9%.
Over the same time span, our AFFO per share grew at 6% annually.
EBITDARM coverage for our same-store acute care hospitals, which make up 72% of our portfolio increased 31% year-over-year on a trailing 12 month basis.
The first quarter 2021 lease coverage was 3.31 times for our acute care sector.
The EBITDARM coverage for the acute care sector increased almost 22% quarter-over-quarter, demonstrating the same type of trajectory that we have seen from previously reported public company filings for hospital operators, acute care operators EBITDARM for same-store increased by more than $400 million year-over-year.
Our LTACH portion of our portfolio, which only represents 1.5% of the total portfolio, as a group continue to perform at the top of their historical coverages.
The same-store EBITDARM increased by more than $25 million year-over-year and generated a trailing 12 month coverage of almost three times and an increase of almost 40 basis points quarter-over-quarter.
The EBITDARM for the trailing 12 months ending the first quarter of 2021 showed a slight improvement over 2020.
Their total portfolio coverage is strongly above two times, their cash balances are higher today than they were at 12/31/20.
You may have also seen that the American based healthcare company Centene has acquired 100% of the remaining shares of Circle that they did not already own.
The coverages are approaching three times and increased quarter-over-quarter by more than 30 basis points.
EBITDARM coverages increased quarter-over-quarter by 40 basis points.
Prime's current EBITDARM coverages are well above their historical highs, their quarter-over-quarter coverage increased by more than 50 basis points, and the overall coverage is well in excess of our average acute care sector.
Prospect has a very strong liquidity position and is generating coverages about 15 basis points above last quarter, their overall coverage is well above historical highs with MPT.
Their quarter-over-quarter coverage showed a more than 16 basis points increase.
With the recent announcement of pending acquisitions in the U.S., our U.S. portion of our total portfolio is expected to be approximately 61%.
The acute care sector is projected to be 72% and our behavioral health 11% once we close on the Miami acute care hospitals and the Springstone transaction, we continue to be very bullish on our tenants and their performance, our balance sheet and liquidity management and our very calculated accretive growth strategy.
Importantly, our AFFO per share increased by a similar 13.3% versus the second quarter of 2020, which along with our already attractive dividend payout ratio of only 82% continues to create capacity for sustained dividend growth.
Adjusted for all mid quarter transactions, including in particular the closing of the Priory sale leaseback as if they all occurred on April 1, normalized FFO for the second quarter would have been $0.44 or an annualized $1.76 per share.
As a reminder, our run rate guidance of $1.72 to $1.76 per share is an estimate of the expected annual FFO for our in place assets, plus other assets that are either under development or subject to binding acquisition agreements.
Neither of which of course are included in our pro forma second quarter $0.44 per share.
First, we recorded a $43 million adjustment to our estimate of net deferred tax liabilities related almost exclusively to the United Kingdom's increase in its corporate income tax rate from 19% to 25%.
This quarter being a $2.1 million decline from the end of the first quarter.
Finally, I'll point out that included in the $18.7 million in property related expenses for the quarter is approximately $16 million for annual property insurance premiums, property taxes, ground lease payments, and other impositions, which are built back to tenants and included as revenue in real estate interest and other income a $1 for $1 offset.
Since our last earnings update, we have announced more than $2 billion in new investments.
Virtually all in the U.S. at a weighted average GAAP yield approximating 8.7% and first year cash yield of about 7%.
Activity began with the announcement of a $950 million investment in 18 inpatient behavioral hospitals, and an equity interest in the operator as Springstone.
In addition to the very attractive terms from the initial 18 hospital portfolio, MPT immediately gains the scale necessary to rapidly grow in new markets in the inpatient behavioral health business, as the U.S. seeks to address unmet and growing demand for acute behavioral care.
Following this announcement, we announced plans to acquire five general acute care hospitals to be operated by Steward in the Miami and Fort Lauderdale area for approximately $900 million.
First, we acquired for $215 million a network of four hospitals and two medical office buildings in densely populated areas of Los Angeles from Pipeline Health.
In addition, we added one hospital in Scotland to our Circle Health relationship for GBP15.6 million.
As of June 30, we have $720 million in unencumbered cash on the balance sheet.
And this does not include about $350 million in repayment proceeds from Priory that are due by the year-end or a $135 million in proceeds from the sale of our Olympia Hospital in Washington state to the largest operator in that state.
This is under binding contract subject only to regulatory approval and will reflect the gain on sale of approximately $30 million.
Nor does it include another $30 million in proceeds from the sale of a smaller hospital that we expect will close imminently.
So between cash on hand and pending contractual proceeds in the near-term, we have total cash of about $1.1 billion available for our pending acquisitions.
We expect to generate $1 billion or more in equity like capital from joint venture like arrangements.
We have also prudently provided liquidity backstops in the form of $2.3 billion in interim and revolver facilities that would temporarily fund these transactions.
