During the quarter, we earned GAAP net income of $153.1 million.
We had another busy quarter as we wrote a record $33.6 billion of new business, which more than offset the pressure of lower annual persistency on our existing book of business and resulted in our insurance in force growing to $262 billion, nearly 14% higher than the same period last year.
An increasing percentage of our new insurance written is from purchase transactions, accounting for 79% of our NIW in the second quarter compared to 60% last quarter.
Our application pipeline, a leading indicator of NIW indicates this trend has continued with purchase transactions continuing to account for more than 85% of the applications received in recent months.
We believe that home prices may be increasing for more sound reasons than in 2005-2007 cycle.
Taking a look at our insurance and force portfolio our loss ratio was a low 11.6% in the quarter.
At quarter end, we maintained a $2.3 billion excess over PMIERs minimum required assets and our PMIERs efficiency ratio was 167% at the end of the second quarter.
Reflecting our capital position and long-term confidence in our transformed business model, a $150 million dividend from MGIC to our holding company was declared, and paid after the end of the second quarter, and the holding company Board authorized a 33% increase in the quarterly common stock dividend.
In the second quarter, we earned $153 million of net income or $0.44 per diluted share and generated an annualized 13% return on beginning shareholders' equity.
This compares to $14 million of net income or $0.04 per diluted share in the same period last year.
During the quarter, total revenues were $298 million compared to $294 million last year, with the increase primarily due to higher net premiums earned.
The net premium yield for the second quarter was 39.1 basis points, which was down 1.8 basis points compared to last quarter.
During the quarter, they totaled $20 million compared to $28 million last quarter and $33 million in the second quarter of 2020.
Net losses incurred were $29 million in the second quarter compared to $217 million in the same period last year and $40 million last quarter.
In the second quarter, we received approximately 9,000 new delinquency notices, which represents less than 1% of the number of loans insured as of the start of the quarter and is 30% less than the number of notices received last quarter.
The estimated claim rate on new notices received in the second quarter of 2021 was approximately 7.5%, compared to approximately 7% in the second quarter of 2020.
The reserve for incurred but not reported or IBNR increased by $4 million to approximately $24 million compared to an increase of $30 million in the second quarter of 2020.
A review of loss reserves on previously received delinquent notices, determined that there was immaterial loss reserve development in the quarter compared to $10 million of unfavorable development in the second quarter of last year.
Of the approximately 43,000 loans in our delinquency inventory at June 30, approximately 55% or 23,600 loans were reported to us to be in forbearance and we estimate that the substantial majority of those loans in forbearance will reach the end of their forbearance period in the second half of 2021.
The number of claims received in the quarter, remained very low and were down 35% from the same period last year, due to the various foreclosure and eviction moratoriums and primary paid claims in the quarter remained low at $11 million.
At the end of the second quarter, we had approximately $772 million of holding company liquidity and a $2.3 billion access to the PMIERs minimum requirements at the writing company.
First, we completed our fifth excess of loss reinsurance transaction executed through an ILN, the third such transaction in the last 10 months.
This most recent transaction provides $400 million of loss protection and increases our PMIERs' excess.
Second, we paid a $150 million dividend from MGIC to our holding company.
The holding company liquidity is above our current target levels, which supported the 33% increase in the common stock dividend.
Additionally, in the third quarter we intend to resume our share repurchase program and we expect that we will fully use the remaining $291 million repurchase authorization prior to its expiration at year-end 2021.
It is a $2.3 billion excess to the PMIERs requirement as of June 30, or 167% PMIERs sufficiency ratio, which was above our current target level and supported the $150 million dividend from MGIC to our holding company.
Although, it's early in the 10 years of new FHFA acting Director Sandra Thompson, at this time we are not aware of any policy initiatives that will provide new challenges to our company or industry.
We have a book of business that has strong underlying credit characteristics, which is supported by a strong and dynamic balance sheet with a low debt-to-capital ratio, an investment portfolio of nearly $7 billion contractual premium flow and a robust reinsurance program.
