Net financial earnings, financial margin, utility gross margin are discussed more fully in Item 7 of our 10-K.
You'll find an agenda on slide 3, outlining our speakers for today.
Looking forward to this discussion and excited to share the progress we've made over the past 12 months.
Going forward from 2022, we are increasing our long-term NFE growth rate to 6% to 10%.
The mid-point of this range is above our previous range of 6% to 8%.
This growth will be fueled by $2.6 billion in planned capex from 2021 through 2024, focused largely on our natural gas and solar businesses.
In fact, we are increasing our annual dividend growth range 6% to 10% and we plan to maintain a reasonable payout ratio along the way.
We are targeting cash flows for the CAGR of about 20% over the next four years.
NJR delivered on our guidance range, generating $2.07 of NFE per share, a growth of almost 6%.
It's been a growth driver since 2009.
We serve approximately 115,000 customers with services that align with our core utility business and that reinforces our overall brand strength and customer loyalty.
I mean the state saw [Phonetic] to become a leader in renewables 10 years ago, we created Clean Energy Ventures and became one of the most significant solar investors in the state.
In New Jersey, 75% of the homes and businesses rely on natural gas service.
In our service territory, that figure is 82% and growing.
The regulated utility will remain our largest segment, both in terms of capital allocation and NFE generation and we expect about 11% rate based CAGR through fiscal 2024 and NFE contributions in the 60% to 70% range over the long-term.
And CEV as we extend our footprint outside of New Jersey, we will allocate more capital to this business reaching a level of $250 million in fiscal 2024.
At the same time, states across the Northeast have adopted aggressive renewable portfolio standards and stable revenue models and Rhode Island for example, who are already moving several projects forward and they have a 20-year feed-in tariff along with power purchase agreements with local utilities.
90% of our NFE and cash flows are expected to be generated by New Jersey Natural Gas and Clean Energy Ventures, our core businesses.
Over the next four years, we expect to invest around 60% of our capital expenditures in New Jersey Natural Gas and 30% in CEV.
We expect New Jersey Natural Gas to achieve 11% rate-based CAGR through fiscal 2024 as I mentioned earlier.
Looking at our capital allocation in a slightly different way, we expect that approximately 50% of our capital expenditures will be allocated to sustainability investments.
Turning to Slide 13, I believe it's important for me to end on a broader sustainability note.
Sustainability is a common thread that ties together all of our companies and the nearly 1,200 people behind them.
Amy Cradic joined NJR in 2018 after a nearly 25-year career in policy and regulatory roles in the highest levels of state government.
In Pat Migliaccio, our CFO who's over 20 years experience in the energy industry across many segments including merchant generation, retail, and utilities.
He's been with NJR for the past 11 years as we've grown into the diversified energy business that we are today.
Today Clean Energy Ventures has invested approximately $1 billion in solar assets in all 21 counties across New Jersey.
Nationally and globally, natural gas demand continues to rise and is expected to grow over the next 30 years.
As an example Germany just announced a $10 billion investment to support a hydrogen economy.
While electrification is an early trend in a 30-year-long transition this single source policy has cost technology and reliability challenges.
The combination of these solutions provides the state the potential to achieve $100 billion of savings for ratepayers as compared to forced electrification alone.
And by nearly 25 years in regulatory and policy roles in government I've learned that any feasible solution to address even the most urgent public issues must take cost into account.
Space heat is the primary use for natural gas in New Jersey and 75% of the state's homes are supported by natural gas.
As you can see from the chart on the right, according to the Federal Energy Information Administration in addition to higher operating costs, the capital cost to install electric heat pumps are about 60% more today than for a comparable heating system.
And natural gas is 70 times more reliable then the electric grid.
On August 4 this year a tropical storm moved up the East Coast bringing wind at 75 miles per hour to take may -- and parts of Ocean County.
Immediately following the storm, NJNG experienced a 53% increase in its normal summer sent out as more than 16,000 of customers turn to their natural gas generators to resume their quality of life.
We talked a lot today about NJR's strong track record in preparing for a clean energy future, so further illustrate this point, I'd like to point out that NJR previously committed to New Jersey's initial global warming response at target of a 20% reduction in emissions by 2020.
We set a goal for our Company to voluntarily reduce our operational emissions in New Jersey to 50% of 2006 levels by 2030.
NJR is now targeting a 60% reduction in emissions from 2006 levels by 2030 which is solidly in line with the state's 80% reduction target by 2015.
Many analysts have noted that we are in the early stages of a $2.5 trillion industry and many of the largest energy companies and gas LDCs across the nation are beginning to study hydrogen with expected cost reductions in renewables and the electrolyzers used to produce hydrogen, the cost of green hydrogen production is estimated to decline by more than half over the next decade and by half again to 2015.
New Jersey set an ambitious goal installing 7500 megawatts of offshore winds by 2035 and a good portion of that will come ashore in our service territory.
Moving to slide 27, I'd like to discuss pipeline quality biomethane referred to as renewable natural gas or RNG.
ICF estimates that by 2050, RNG can represent nearly half of New Jersey Natural Gas usage economywide.
Turning to slide 28, before I hand it over to Mark, I want to take a moment to reiterate some of the key sustainability things we discussed.
Natural gas demand will continue to grow over the next 30 years and our storage and transportation assets are strategically located to capture value along the way.
This was a remarkable installation of just over 9,000 [Indecipherable] of distribution main, hold about a 100 feet below the Brunner Green Bay, [Phonetic] but now connects the Mainland for the Brunner Island in [Indecipherable].
And while we have done an exceptional job of reducing infrastructure risk in eliminating due to the emissions from our system operations, there is still work to do and that will result an expected future rate base compounded annual growth rate of more than 11% for 2024.
New Jersey Natural Gas proudly serves more than 1.5 million people in three desirable counties in New Jersey, with growth expected for the foreseeable future.
That shore is generally Ocean County, which was largely populated by active adult communities and where there has been robust growth for more than 30 years and was residents wealth is not shown in traditional measures.
New Jersey Natural Gas customer base is comprised of 93% residential customers along with the associated commercial establishments that serve their daily needs.
As we look at the forecasted population, according to New Jersey Department of Labor over 240,000 people are expected to move into our service area boding well for new construction, especially in Ocean County which remains one of the fastest growing cabins in New Jersey.
In fiscal 2020, we had 8,349 customers consistent with our recent history about 65% of that growth came from new construction and the other came from convergence.
Regarding the customer additions, we view this as a near-term delay and remain confident in reaching our three-year target of 28,000 to 30,000 new customers by the end of 2023.
Based on current rates, this will add cumulative utility gross margin of approximately $18 million of our three-year planning period, but what makes us so confident about our outlook, residential permitting remains robust in our territory and based on our current experience, we expect more than 90% of those new residences will choose natural gas of those business hours [Phonetic].
We have also almost 100,000 customers that could potentially convert to natural gas.
That is why we can confidently predict that by the end of fiscal 2023, we expect to serve nearly 590,000 customers.
Let us take a closer look at the value we deliver to our customers on Slide 35.
Over the past 12 years, New Jersey Natural Gas's average natural gas bill has declined by more than 32% in real terms.
Earlier this year, we were proud to receive our 11 JD Power Award, which marks six consecutive years of leadership in our segment.
Making sure that every interaction with our customer is handled expertly, actively supporting the communities and solutions in our service territory and living our mission to provide safe and reliable service 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, is why NJNG has been a perennial leader in the JD Power customer satisfaction survey in the largest category.
On Slide 37, you will see that we favorably measure up against our peers in generating superior operational results.
Further, we have 20 times dual lease that median AGA company.
Nearly 100% of our system is composed to be the plastic or protected steel.
We have invested more than $1.9 billion in our delivery system in the last decade thus reducing the methane emissions by more than 900 metric tons since 2015.
That's equal to driving 2.2 million miles.
That's like driving around the world 88 times.
And here on Slide 39, I'd like to touch on our strong regulatory relationships, operational efficiency, and infrastructure investments that are driving margin growth for NJR while also delivering savings to our customers.
Our BGSS mechanism not only protects NJNG from commodity price risk but also incentivizes us to optimize the supply portfolio to first ensure us 100% supply reliability and second to optimize those assets in a way that reduces our cost to customers.
Through capacity release, off-system sales, and storage optimization, we have saved customers more than $1 billion since inception.
And annually, we contribute on average about $9 million to utility gross margin, but the key to our success in the past, present, and future is the safety, reliability, and resilience of our underground network and that requires investment in infrastructure beyond the accelerated mechanisms to recover those investments require traditional rate cases.
Our last base rate case was settled with a rate base of $1.76 billion as of August 2019 with rates effective November 15th of 2019.
Between that case and fiscal 2024, we expect a rate-based compound annual growth rate of more than 11% as we complete several of our major infrastructure and IT-related capital projects like the Southern Reliability Link and Project NEXT, which is a major [Indecipherable].
So as we turn to our capital expenditures on Slide 41, looking forward, our future capex seen in the chart shows the breakout for the $1.5 billion that we plan to deploy in the next four years to grow our system, fulfill our mission of providing safe and reliable natural gas and prepare for the future.
We now have 26 of the 30 miles built and upon completion, will put the SRL into service with timely recovery and rate base [Phonetic].
On October 28th, the BPU approved $150 million Infrastructure Investment Program or IIP as mentioned earlier.
More than 62,000 customers have invested in energy efficiency and we have helped create meaningful jobs by supporting over 2,700 contractors who participated in the program and generated over $550 million in economic activity in our state.
Recently, NJNG filed its new $258 million safety [Phonetic] program that will effectuate that migration.
From a historical perspective, our earlier saving program spend was about $5 million to $15 million.
Our current program is about $30 million annually.
If the filing is approved, we can invest more than double that in the future and on a full-weighted average cost of capital on the unamortized balances and those will be now amortized over 10 years versus the seven years that in our current program.
The approved ROE was 9.6% with an equity layer of 54% and we received full recovery of our planned investments to that fee [Phonetic].
We also saw a timely resolution of that case as we filed on our March 29th, 2019 and rates became effective 7.5 months later.
First and foremost, our strategic infrastructure investments and accelerated mechanisms will fuel an 11% rate base CAGR through 2024.
In 2010, I joined NJR and have over 30 years of experience in the energy field.
Since then, we have persevered and have vested approximately $1 billion in this business.
Turning to Slide 47 and how CEV is driving value as part of NJR.
NJR's CEV is the largest in-state solar operator in New Jersey with about 11% of total market share in the state and we are a leading New Jersey's clean energy future.
CEV's portfolio totals about 350 megawatts of installed capacity that produces energy each and every day.
Our commercial solar projects represent the largest segment in our portfolio with 276 megawatts of installed capacity across 49 active projects in the state.
On the residential side, our portfolio accounts for 74 megawatts of installed capacity.
Through our Sunlight Advantage leasing program, NJR CEV owns, operates, and maintains each residential system with over 8,600 customers enjoying savings of 20% to 30% off of their electric utility rate.
Here you can see over the past decade CEV has invested approximately $1 billion in New Jersey's solar market.
Looking ahead on Slide 50, let's talk about the future of the U.S. solar industry.
Over the next five years, we expect to see more solar installed than we saw in the last 10.
Here we can see that NJR CEV expects to invest $850 million over the next four years.
This essentially doubles our rate of investment when compared to the last 10 and will double our installed capacity from approximately 350 megawatts today to approximately 770 megawatts in only four years.
On the next slide, we can see that as a result of this investment we expect that by the end of 2024, CEV revenues will be approaching $170 million, an approximate 60% increase compared to fiscal year 2020 revenues.
Turning to Slide 53, clearly CEV has had great success over the past decade, but we recognize that we must adapt to changing marketplace conditions in order to extend that track record into the future.
Today, it's projected that ITCs for the solar industry will decline from a high of 30% down to 10% in the near future.
Our first strategy pillar is shown here on Slide 55 to expand into adjacent markets that offer attractive returns.
Projects like the one in Rhode Island where our $20 million investment has revenue streams fully contracted with an investment grade utility.
On Slide 58, you could see this strategy at work.
On Slide 59, we could see the benefits of tax efficiency, the third pillar of our strategy, weaken accomplishes by prioritizing tax equity finance in the form of lease bags.
Ultimately, we believe that this strategic plan will enable us to drive profitable growth across the business and maintain current project returns even after ITCs reduced to 10%.
Well, I'm relative newcomer to NJR, I spent my entire 38-year career in the natural gas industry.
Here you can see the quality of the revenue our portfolio generates from an attractive mix of creditworthy customers paying predominantly take or pay fees to reserve capacity 365 days a year.
On this slide, you can see our top 10 customers, which is an attractive mix of utility, pipeline, power, producer and marketer companies that our assets have served continuously for many years.
In addition, our contracting profile is very manageable with an average remaining contract term of 4.5 years and the majority of our revenue in future years were locked in undertake or pay contracts.
A type of storage which makes up only 10% of total US storage capacity.
For example, Southern Company move from 2007 through 2019 increased gas source generation from 15% to 50% of reducing coal source generation from 70% to 22% is Leaf River's largest customer.
Its revenues are 88% fee-based and anchored by long-term utility customers Con Ed and New Jersey Natural Gas.
Project capacity is fully committed allowing Adelphia Gateway to generate 97% fee-based revenue with an average remaining contract term of 7.1 years beginning fiscal 2020.
The opportunity to capture increased transportation value and contracts begin to roll over in 2025 and attractive compression expansion options, and the potential for expanded supply access from either the PennEast or Transco REA projects.
PennEast is a 120 mile Greenfield pipeline, which will create an attractive new path for Northeast Pennsylvania Marcellus supply to reach Atlantic region utility markets.
PennEast is currently plan to be constructed in phases of construction in the first 68 miles in Pennsylvania commencing in 2021 pending receipt of final FERC and state authorizations.
Over a 30-year career in the energy industry, I have worked for LDCs and gas-fired generator, and natural gas producer, and for the past 22 years at NJRs Energy Services.
This business was launched 25 years ago on the expertise gained in managing our utilities gas suppliers with strong and effective risk management strategies and controls in place.
And when called on the gases price that are fixed premium to index, which in this region could be Transco Zone 6, New York, for example.
Now turning to Slide 79.
We currently have firm storage capacity of about 34 Bcf and we hold about 1 Bcf a day as firm transportation capacity in multiple connected regions.
Peak market conditions can increase the value of market area transportation to over $100 a dekatherm.
NJR ES has a proven track record of success and profitability since 1995.
This chart goes back 10 years to 2010 over which time Energy Services averaged $64.75 million in financial margin.
Over these 10 years, this cash generation has reduced our overall funding needs.
2020 was the first time in 25 years of our history that we've lost money on a net financial earnings basis.
We have 25 professionals with expertise in trading, operations, risk, asset acquisition, contracting, regulatory affairs and information technology.
I've been with NJR for 11 years now, and my role of CFO for five.
We do this by following the principles that are outlined on slide 83.
As Steve mentioned earlier, we're investing $2.6 billion of capital the next four years almost 90% of it into our utility and solar energy projects.
Before we get into NJR's outlook, I'll take you through the highlights of fiscal 2020 on slide 84.
For fiscal 2020, NJR reported NFE of $196 million or $2.07 per share compared to NFE of $175 million or $1.96 per share in 2019.
NJNG saw an NFE improvement year-over-year of approximately $49 million to higher base rates and lower O&M expenses, principally resulting from COVID-19.
S&T saw an improvement of $3 million during the year, driven by increased operating income from Leaf River and Adelphia slightly offset by higher O&M, interest expenses related to those assets.
CEV saw a decrease of $24.5 million, primarily due to lower ITC eligible capital expenditures as compared to the prior year, as well as the absence of contributions of the wind portfolio, which was sold in 2019.
Energy Services decreased about $11 million due to lower natural gas price volatility resulting from the warmer than normal winter compounded by operational issues on key interstate pipeline.
Finally NJR Home Services and Other increased $4 million mainly due to lower O&M expenses and income tax benefit associated with the revaluation of certain deferred state tax liabilities.
We're setting our initial guidance at a range of $1.55 to $1.65.
There are few factors that are driving this as outlined on slide 85.
As Mark Kahrer noted in his materials, we expect to spend north of $200 million to replace the IT infrastructure that supports New Jersey Natural Gas, including our work in asset management and customer billing systems.
These items taken together total a range of approximately $0.12 to $0.16.
Importantly, as we look forward, we expect O&M growth to average less than 2% through 2024.
In addition, in fiscal year 2020, we placed approximately $159 million of utility infrastructure into service.
We're reflecting an improvement over the prior year, the contribution is less than 5% of our guidance for this year.
The top quartile rate base CAGR of 11% plus, NJNG will have strong NFE and cash flow growth.
For CEV with the financing and accounting changes behind us, we expect to grow our capacity CAGR of 21% resulting in more than 400 megawatts of additional capacity with a long track record of success in our solar business.
Moving to slide 87, and as I said earlier, fiscal 2021 is a reset year for NJR.
With NFE earnings per share guidance of $1.55 to $1.65 supporting the growth in fiscal 2022 is the successful conclusion of our rate case of New Jersey Natural Gas, the expected completion of Adelphia Gateway and our solar investments.
This should result in NFE earnings per share growth of over 30% from 2021.
Our guidance for fiscal 2022 is a range of $2.05 to $2.15.
We expect to grow at a rate of between 6% and 10% thereafter.
On slide 88, you can see we're targeting a dividend growth rate of 6% to 10% in line with our long-term NFE earnings per share growth rate.
We're planning to invest nearly $2.6 billion over the next several years at NJNG and at CEV.
Now on slide 89, you can see why we're extremely confident in our ability to continue to grow the dividend.
On slide 90, we provide the expected segment contributions for fiscal '21, 2022 and beyond.
As Steve mentioned earlier in his remarks and as shown on slide 91, we changed our accounting policy for investment tax credits or ITCs.
This result in the value of the ITC being amortized over the life of our solar assets, usually between 20 and 35 years.
As Mark Valori mentioned earlier, we expect to grow our investment in commercial solar assets from $140 million today to $225 million in fiscal 2024 to take advantage of a significantly growing opportunity for investment and to drive growth for NJR.
This is illustrated on slide 92.
However, instead of recognizing the value of the ITC through tax expense as was the case under the flow through method more than offset to depreciation expense as will be the case under the full method, 20% of the economic, the ITC is recognized each year in other income, beginning on the one-year anniversary of the solar projects in service date.
As you can see on slide 93, our FFO to debt ratio lies as the high teens by 2024, which would support a strong investment-grade equivalent.
As you can see from slide 94, we manage the debt needs of NJNG separately from NJR.
And on slide 95, you see there is approximately half of our funding needs for fiscal 2024 are expected to be supplied from cash flow from operations.
Second, following that reset, we have strong NFE earnings per share growth of over 30% in 2022, and then 6% to 10% thereafter.
Third, we're committed to growing a dividend at a rate of 6% to 10%.
We expected approximately 11% rate base CAGR through fiscal 2024 and CEV will be investing $850 million in solar over the next four years.
