Additionally, I'm pleased to note that our commitment to working safely has not wavered through these volatile times as we achieved a total recordable incident rate of 0.35 through the first half of the year.
As we discussed on last quarter's call, we moved quickly to adjust our cost structure beginning in the first quarter and have now reduced our global workforce by 25% in the first half of the year, including a 50% reduction in the Fluids U.S. land business.
These workforce reductions combined with temporary salary reductions for the majority of our U.S. employees plus the suspension of the company contribution to our U.S. retirement plan and the implementation of furloughs have resulted in roughly $65 million of annualized savings representing approximately one-third of our total personnel expense.
In light of the current market softness, we are further streamlining and reducing our operational footprint in the U.S. Fluids business with a total of 12 site closures now completed or under way.
As a result of these actions, our second quarter results included $3.6 million of charges for employee separation costs and facility closures, substantially all in the Fluids business.
We also recognized an $8.3 million non-cash writedown of our Fluids Systems inventory.
For the second quarter, we generated $21 million of free cash flow and reduced our total debt by $27 million.
To that point, I'd like to note that we are seeing tangible progress on this front with our non-E&P customer base growing by roughly 15% within the past year.
And although COVID has contributed to an 11% year-over-year decline in the first half non-E&P revenues, we see the expanding customer base beyond traditional E&P customers as critical to accelerating future growth when the market eventually recovers.
The shift can be seen in our second quarter results with the revenue contribution from U.S. land declining 38% of total Fluids Systems revenues, while the revenue from the Middle East, a strategically important market for us, has increased to 17% of the total segment revenues, a new high watermark.
Our Fluids Systems segment posted second quarter 2020 revenues of $75 million, reflecting a 44% sequential decline.
With a combined impact from the collapse in the oil and gas market and the COVID-related disruptions, revenues declined sharply in all major regions with the exception of the Middle East, which improved 9% over Q1.
North American Fluids Systems revenues declined by $41 million sequentially, which included a $30 million reduction in U.S. land markets and a $10 million decline in Canada.
Outside of North America, revenues pulled back by $17 million from Q1 reflecting a larger than anticipated impact from COVID restrictions combined with lower commodity prices.
In the Mats segment, the increasing COVID-related disruptions attributable to customer permitting delays and logistical restrictions led to a $6 million sequential decline in rental and service revenues in the second quarter.
In the Fluids Systems segment, revenues from U.S. land declined 52% sequentially to $28 million in the second quarter, tracking in line with the reduction in U.S. rig count.
Despite executing the necessary cost actions and facility closures, we exited the second quarter with more than a 20% share of the active rigs, a record level for the company.
As we anticipated on last quarter's call, our Gulf of Mexico business fared considerably better than U.S. land generating revenues of $14 million in the second quarter, reflecting an 11% sequential decrease.
In Canada, revenues declined 77% to $3 million in the second quarter.
Despite the sharp decline, our performance compares favorably to the overall market rig count, which declined 87% sequentially.
We experienced some level of pullback in all key international markets with the exception of the Middle East, which contributed $13 million of revenue in the quarter benefiting from strong activity in Kuwait and higher completion chemistry product sales into Saudi Arabia.
Total international revenues pulled back 37% sequentially to $29 million in the second quarter with operations in North Africa and Italy contributing $12 million of that decline.
On a year-over-year basis, our Fluids Systems revenues declined 57% compared to Q2 of 2019 with a majority of the reduction driven by U.S. land.
U.S. land revenues declined by $73 million or 72% driven by the collapse in rig count while the Gulf of Mexico activity has remained relatively stable declining only 14% year-over-year.
International revenues also declined $21 million or 43% year-over-year with declines seen across all markets, except the Middle East, which benefited from our growth in Kuwait as well as product sales into Saudi Arabia from our Cleansorb acquisition last November.
As discussed on May's call, we've continued our aggressive cost actions reducing our total U.S. Fluids workforce by more than 35% in the second quarter while also implementing salary reductions and furloughed programs to retain key talent.
Combined, these and other cost reduction programs have reduced our U.S. personnel expense by over 40% from the beginning of the year.
We are also exiting several of our U.S. facilities and, as highlighted in yesterday's release, our Fluids Systems second quarter results include $11.7 million of charges related to inventory writedowns, employee separation costs, and facility closures contributing to a $25 million operating loss for the quarter.
Turning to the Mats business, total segment revenues declined 14% sequentially to $27 million in the second quarter, reflecting the COVID-related impacts that Paul touched on as well as continued softening in the E&P activity on U.S. rental and service projects.
With scheduled projects being pushed back, rental and service revenues declined $6 million to $22 million in the second quarter.
Product sales improved modestly to $5 million for the quarter, although several customers continue to defer purchasing decisions citing COVID uncertainty.
From an end market mix perspective, $19 million of revenue was derived from energy infrastructure and other non-E&P markets representing more than two-thirds of our total segment revenue.
Of the $8 million in revenues derived from E&P customers, the majority was generated within the gas focused basins in the Northeast.
Compared to the second quarter of last year, Mats segment revenues declined $17 million, largely reflecting a $13 million decline in E&P rental and service and a $3 million decline in non-E&P rental and service.
In response to near-term market weakness, our Mats business implemented certain cost actions including roughly 10% reduction in workforce in the quarter.
With a $4 million sequential decline in revenues, the Mats segment operating income declined $2 million, resulting in second quarter operating income of $1 million and EBITDA of $6 million.
Total corporate office expenses declined modestly to $6.5 million in the second quarter as compared to $6.7 million in the first quarter.
On a year-over-year basis, corporate office expenses declined by $4 million primarily driven by $2 million of strategic planning costs incurred in the prior year along with a $1.5 million reduction in personnel costs.
SG&A costs were $21 million in the second quarter compared to $25 million in the first quarter.
On a year-over-year basis, SG&A cost declined $7 million, largely reflecting lower personnel expense, strategic planning costs, and legal and professional spending.
During the quarter, we continued the execution of our debt reduction plans purchasing a total of $18.6 million par value of our 2021 convertible notes for $15.3 million representing a $3.3 million discount to par.
The purchases required a $2 million non-cash write-off of associated unamortized debt discount and issuance costs resulting in a $1.3 million gain on the extinguishment of debt.
The purchases bring our year-to-date total to $33 million of par value retired leaving $67 million of convertible notes outstanding at the end of the second quarter.
With the benefit of the decline in interest rates and the note repurchases, interest expense declined to $2.9 million in the second quarter, which includes $1.2 million of non-cash amortization of facility fees and discounts.
As of the end of the second quarter, the weighted average cash borrowing rate on our outstanding debt was approximately 3%.
The second quarter benefit from income taxes was $6.7 million, which reflects a 20% effective tax rate for the second quarter and 14% for the first half of 2020.
This compares to a net loss of $0.14 per share in the first quarter, which included $0.02 of charges.
Net income was $0.05 per diluted share in the second quarter of last year.
Second quarter cash provided by operating activities was $21 million which included a $35 million net reduction in working capital.
Our cash balance declined $6 million reflecting our continuing progress in repatriating excess cash from our foreign subsidiaries.
Our cash generation, including the impact of the repatriation efforts in the quarter, was used to pay down our debt balance, including a $19 million reduction in convertible bonds and a $15 million reduction in our U.S. asset based loan facility.
With the benefits of this debt repayments, our total debt balance declined to $136 million while our cash balance ended the second quarter of $43 million resulting in a total debt-to-capital ratio of 21% and a net debt to capital ratio of 15%.
Our primary debt components include the remaining $67 million of convertible notes due December 2021 and $64 million outstanding on our U.S. asset based bank facility, which runs to 2024.
Substantially all of our $43 million of cash on hand resides in our international subsidiaries.
With regard to cash flows, with more than $230 million of net working capital, we expect working capital reductions to provide a tailwind to cash generation for the next several quarters.
During the second quarter, the Fluids Systems revenue contribution from offshore and international markets increased to 62% while the revenue contribution from national and international oil companies increased to 54% of segment revenues.
With more than $300 million of receivables and inventory on the balance sheet at the end of the second quarter and only limited capital expenditures on the horizon, we expect to continue to generate positive cash flow for the remainder of 2020.
