For the full-year 2020, we generated $52 million of free cash flow and reduced our outstanding debt by $73 million, expanding our liquidity and ending the year with only $87 million of total debt, our lowest debt level in more than 20 years.
More specifically, despite a significant COVID-driven slowdown in customer activities across all end-markets in 2020, our Site and Access Solutions business, formerly known as Mats and Integrated Services, delivered 9% year-on-year growth in rental and service revenues from the utility sector.
In the face of the distressed US oil field, we successfully ramped up production of disinfectants and industrial cleaning products, delivering $11 million of revenue for the full year, including $8 million in the fourth quarter.
This segment contributed nearly 40% of our consolidated revenue in the fourth quarter, generating an operating margin of 19%.
For the full year 2020, the Industrial Solutions segment generated $138 million of revenue and $34 million of EBITDA, reflecting a 25% EBITDA margin.
We reduced our roof line and cost structure, harvested working capital and redeployed our Conroe facility to serve market where we can provide a stronger return, all of which reduced our Fluids Systems net capital employed by nearly $125 million or roughly 30% during the past year.
I'm pleased to highlight that consolidated revenues increased 35% in the quarter to $130 million, driven by strong sequential improvement across both segments, generating $15 million in free cash flow.
The Industrial Solutions segment contributed $50 million of revenues in the fourth quarter, which includes $8 million from our industrial blending operations.
Our Site and Access Solutions business contributed $43 million of revenue, a $14 million sequential improvement.
The fourth quarter benefited from stronger direct sales, reflecting improvement demand from the utility sector, along with a 26% increase in rental and service revenues, driven by elevated utility activity along the Gulf Coast.
In the fluids business, we're also seeing early signs of oil and gas market recovery, with revenues improving 17% sequentially, primarily driven by $8 million dollar increase in North American land.
In the Gulf of Mexico, although we experienced some weather-related disruptions early in the fourth quarter, revenues improved $4 million, as compared to Q3, as the previous quarter experienced repeated weather-related work stoppages.
Internationally, fluids revenues improved 8% sequentially, although activities in key markets in Europe and the Middle East continued to be impacted by travel and operational restrictions imposed by local governments in response to surge in COVID.
In the Industrial Solutions segment, total revenues increased to $50 million in the fourth quarter, including $8 million from industrial blending, reflecting a full quarter production.
Focusing specifically on the Site and Access Solutions business, rental and service revenues increased 26% sequentially to $29 million and outpaced our expectations for the quarter, benefiting from stronger activity from the utility sector along the Gulf Coast.
Revenues from product sales more than doubled sequentially to $14 million for the fourth quarter, benefiting from the Q4 seasonal strength from the utility sector, although demand remains somewhat suppressed by COVID headwinds relative to the year-end strike seen in prior years.
Looking at the Site and Access Solutions revenues in total, more than 80% of our Q4 revenues were derived from non-E&P markets, with the utility sector representing the largest end-market.
Comparing to the fourth quarter of last year, revenues from the Site and Access Solutions business declined to $12 million or 22%, driven by a $14 million decline in direct sales attributable to the COVID headwinds on customer purchasing.
Rental and service revenues grew 5% year-over-year, reflecting a dramatic shift in end-market mix.
Specifically, while E&P customer revenue declined 40% from Q4 of last year, this was more than offset by a 43% improvement from the electrical utility and other industrial end-markets, which contributed a quarterly high of $22 million in revenues to the fourth quarter of 2020.
Benefiting from the stronger revenues, the Industrial Solutions segment operating income improved to $10 million sequentially, contributing $15 million of EBITDA to the fourth quarter.
Turning to Fluids Systems, total segment revenues improved by $12 million or 17% sequentially, with the prior-quarter results including $2.6 million of cleaning product revenues revenues.
Revenues from U.S. land increased $4 million, reflecting the benefit of the 21% improvement in market rig count and an uptick in stimulation chemical revenues.
In the Gulf of Mexico, revenues improved by more than 50% sequentially to $12 million in the fourth quarter, coming off an extremely challenging third quarter, which was impacted by the repeated hurricane shutdowns.
In Canada, revenues more than tripled sequentially to $6 million in the fourth quarter, benefiting from a doubling of the market rig count along with the impact of customer projects economy.
Total international revenues improved 8% sequentially to $28 million, with operations in North Africa contributing substantially all of the improvement, while revenue from the Middle East remained relatively flat at $9 million in the fourth quarter.
On a year-over-year basis, our Fluids Systems revenues declined 41%, compared to Q4 of 2019.
North American land revenues declined by $13 million[Phonetic] or 42%, which is favorable to the 59% decline in market rig count, primarily reflecting the benefit of our increased market share.
Gulf of Mexico revenues remained much more stable, declining only 8% year-over-year, driven primarily by the timing of customer activities.
International revenues declined $24 million or 47% year-over-year, with declines seen across substantially all markets in Europe, the Middle East and North Africa, including a significant impact from COVID.
Total expenses were $5.9 million in the fourth quarter, reflecting a $700,000 reduction from the third quarter.
On a year-over-year basis, corporate office expenses declined $3 million, primarily driven by a reduction in personnel costs and performance-based incentives.
SG&A costs were $20 million in the fourth quarter, down modestly from the third quarter.
On a year-over-year basis, SG&A costs declined $7 million, largely reflecting lower personnel expense, legal and professional spending and the benefits of other cost reduction efforts.
Interest expense increased slightly to $2.5 million in the fourth quarter, nearly half of which reflects non-cash amortization of facility fees and discounts.
Our weighted average cash borrowing rate on our outstanding debt was approximately 3%.
The fourth quarter benefit from income taxes was $600,000, which reflects a 3% effective rate for the fourth quarter.
The low tax benefit rate for the quarter primarily reflects the impact of the non-deductible currency loss associated with our exit from Brazil and a $700,000 charge to partially reduce U.S. tax credit carry-forwards that may not be realized.
This compares to a net loss of $0.26 per share in the third quarter, which included $0.04 of charges, and a net loss of $0.19 per share in the fourth quarter of last year, which included $0.19 of charges.
Turning to cash flow, for the fourth quarter, cash provided by operating activities was $15 million, which included an $11 million net reduction in working capital.
Benefiting from our consistent positive free cash flow generation, our total debt balance declined $15 million in the quarter to $87 million.
Our primary debt components include the remaining $67 million of convertible notes due in December and $19 million outstanding on our U.S. asset-based bank facility, which runs through 2024.
Our cash balance ended the year at $24 million, substantially all of which resides in our international subsidiaries.
At year-end, our total debt-to-capital ratio was 15% and net debt-to-capital ratio was 11%.
In Fluids Systems, we expect Q1 will build upon the early recovery we saw in Q4, with topline anticipated to improve by roughly 15% sequentially.
The improvements are expected to come primarily from North American land, where U.S. market rig count is tracking more than 20% above Q4 levels and Canada benefits from the typical Q1 seasonal strength.
Corporate office spending should remain near to $6 million level in the near-term.
With regards to cash flows, as Paul touched on, we've entered 2021 with our lowest debt level in more than 20 years and well-positioned to meet our business needs beyond the convertible note maturity later this year.
With the benefit of the $8 million of international financing closed this week, we further reduced our ABL Facility borrowings by roughly $10 million in the first six weeks of 2021.
Michael brings over 34 years of electric operations experience, most recently serving as both Interim President and as Senior Vice President for electric operations.
We're also very pleased with the rapid transition and scale up of our industrial blending business in 2020, which is now running at roughly $30 million in annualized revenue.
Although, historically representing a very small portion of the energy landscape, Newpark has been working in the geothermal space over 15 years, drilling hundreds of wells around the world.
