The pass code you will need for both numbers is 7440669.
Our industry that has experienced more change recently than at any time since our founding in 1993, in response, we set out to build the capabilities and scale needed to generate superior returns in this marketplace.
We generally like to hold an excess capital buffer of up to $1 billion, which gives us the flexibility to take advantage of future opportunities.
As I mentioned in the last call, we issued $500 million of our Series G perpetual preference shares in the third quarter.
The Series G has a fixed-for-life dividend 4.20%, and we used $275 million of the proceeds to refinance our five 3/8 Series E preference shares.
As a result, we increased our outstanding preference equity by $225 million.
We also purchased 1.5 million common shares for about $224 million in the third quarter.
This works out to an average price per share of about $151 and an average price to book value of less than 1.2 times our current book value.
And as of October 21, had repurchased an additional 518,000 shares for $75 million at an average price of just over $145 per share.
In total, this year, we have repurchased five million shares for $780 million at an average price of $155 per share, reducing our share count by about 10% of the year-end 2020 total.
Even after weather-related large losses and our active share repurchases, our total common and preferred equity position was $6.75 billion at the end of the quarter, this is roughly flat compared to our equity position immediately following last year's equity raise and provides us with scale and flexibility to effectively execute our strategy with improved capital efficiency.
We reported a net loss of $450 million and operating loss of $415 million for the quarter.
These results were driven by a net negative impact of $727 million from the weather-related large losses, primarily from Hurricane Ida, record flooding in the Northwestern Europe and losses from aggregate contracts.
As a result, we reported an annualized return on average common equity of negative 28% and annualized operating return on average common equity of negative 26%.
I will now shift to our three drivers of profit, starting with underwriting income, where we grew gross premiums written by $631 million or 55% with the Property segment growing $346 million and the Casualty segment growing $285 million.
This quarter, we reported $255 million of reinstatement premiums from the weather-related large losses.
This compares to $54 million of reinstatement premiums related to the Q3 2020 large loss events.
Excluding these reinstatement premiums, gross premiums written were up 39%.
Year-to-date, net premiums written were up 44% to $4.8 billion, and we remain on track to comfortably surpass $1 billion in growth for the year, even when excluding reinstatement premiums.
We reported underwriting losses of $679 million in the quarter and a combined ratio of 145%, 74 percentage points of which are from the weather-related large losses.
Specifically, 43 points are from Hurricane Ida and 19 points are from European floods.
Our Property segment, where gross premiums written increased by $346 million or 81%.
Reinstatement premiums from large loss events in the third quarter increased by $202 million year-over-year, with the vast majority impacting the property catastrophe class of business.
Excluding this growth, growth in property -- excluding these, growth in property premiums was $144 million or 38%, with other property up $182 million or 73% and property catastrophe down $38 million or 30%.
We reported a current accident year loss ratio of 180% and a combined ratio of 184% in the Property segment, driven by the weather-related large losses, which added 141 percentage points to the combined ratio.
The current accident year loss ratio of 112% included 66 percentage points from the weather-related large losses.
The attritional portion of other property business has been steadily improving since last year and has been consistently below 50% in 2021.
There were also 18 points of favorable development in property this quarter, primarily related to the 2017 to 2019 large catastrophe events in the property catastrophe class of business.
Now moving on to our casualty results, where we reported gross premiums written of $1 billion, growing $285 million or 40% versus the comparable quarter.
The combined ratio for casualty was 99.6%, and current accident year loss ratio was 69%.
The weather-related large losses added 3.5 percentage points to these ratios.
These improved margins both in casualty and other property are on an increased earned premium base, up 43% and 73%, respectively, from the third quarter, while our capital base remains flat.
This demonstrates the enhanced premium leverage we are starting to achieve following our growth initiatives in these segments over the last 12 to 18 months.
Total fee income in the quarter was $28 million, which reflects the impact of the weather-related large losses in 2021.
Overall, we shared $198 million of underwriting losses with partners in our joint ventures as reflected in our redeemable noncontrolling interest, driven by weather-related large losses.
Net investment income was $78 million, which is consistent with the second quarter of 2021.
This was partially offset by $42 million in realized and unrealized losses, resulting in total investment returns of $36 million.
$31 million of these realized and unrealized losses came from our fixed maturity portfolio and were primarily related to increased interest rates on medium and some longer duration treasuries and a modest widening in credit spreads in some sectors.
The yield on our retained fixed maturity portfolio stayed constant at 1.3% and the duration on our retained portfolio decreased slightly to 3.7 years.
Starting with the acquisition expense ratio, which remained flat at 22%.
The casualty expense ratio increased by four percentage points to 28%, which is consistent with our expectation.
The property acquisition expense ratio decreased by three percentage points to 16%, primarily related to the increase in reinstatement premiums.
Our direct expense ratio, which is the sum of our operational and corporate expenses divided by net premiums earned was 5%.
On an absolute basis, operational expenses were up in the quarter, but the operational expense ratio declined by one percentage point to 4%.
In October, the OECD announced a framework between many countries to institute a 15% global minimum tax.
As an example, our many decades of research on the climate influence on Atlantic hurricanes helps inform our belief that the recent active Epoch since 1995 appropriately constitutes a new baseline from which to further refine the assumptions that underlie our hurricane wind risk models.
In other words, due to climate change, we believe that the elevated average of the last 25 years to depicts a more representative view of hurricane risk for the present and that the long-term historic record, which serves as the baseline for the vendor hurricane models is a poor guide for the future.
In the same way that the 10-year period prior to Hurricane Irma was a statistical outlier due to the absence of U.S. landfalling hurricanes.
We believe that we are successfully doing this One indication is that actual hurricane losses in the United States have averaged about $18.4 billion over the last five years, which is below the average that our models predict.
For example, PCS is currently estimating that Hurricane Ida industry loss is at $29 billion.
Our models indicate that the Ida industry loss is about a one in five-year event for the U.S. and about a one in 30-year event for the Gulf.
The third quarter also experienced a large European flood from burns, which is further evidence of the expanding influence of climate change, burned is likely to be about the $12 billion to $15 billion industry event, which, in our view, is a 50- to 100-year return period for the barrel of flood in the U.K. and Europe taken together.
This is the most impacted and dislocated segment of the property market and our underwriters have definitely leveraged into this space, driving more than $1.3 billion in gross premium so far in 2021.
We have discussed our casualty book being rate adequate over a rolling 10-year period.
Finally, putting aside the ongoing organic growth we have planned for 2022 by simply earning through the casualty portfolio that we have already written, we expect to grow net earned premiums by over $400 million.
Over the past five years, we have grown our partner capital by approximately $5.2 billion, which represents a compounded annual growth rate of about 30%.
