The entire SLG team is here at 420 Lexington Avenue, where we are doing our final earnings call from our Board room in the landmark Graybar building as our next call will be done from our new offices at One Vanderbilt Avenue.
For almost 22 years, Graybar has been our headquarters and base of operation for all that we've accomplished.
The financial and tech sectors in New York City, which account for over half of the office space demand, are doing extremely well and they added 5,000 office using jobs in December alone.
The city is forecasting a significant amount of new office jobs in 2021, such that we would return to pre-pandemic office employment levels by the fourth quarter of this year, recouping all of the 165,000 office jobs lost at the outset of the pandemic.
The credit markets remain quite strong with commercial mortgage interest rate levels in and around the 2.5% level and new construction activity has substantially declined, which combined with job growth will enable supply to come back into balance with tenant demand.
During that seven-week period, we signed 200,000 square feet of Manhattan office leases while adding 240,000 square feet of new pipeline, thus increasing our current pipeline as we sit here today to 700,000 square feet, higher than on December 7.
With the leases we expect to sign over the next 60 days, we anticipate being on schedule for our total projected volume for the year of 1.3 million square feet; one of the 18 or so goals and objectives we laid out for everybody in the investor conference.
Of particular note are the lease transactions we announced yesterday, starting with the Beam Suntory deal for 100,000 square feet at 11 Madison Avenue, filling the space which had been vacant since April of 2019.
The Suntory deal and the 92,000 square foot Freshly deal at 63 Madison Avenue, also recently announced, affirms the development strategy that is the underpinning of our One Madison Avenue development project, which is now fully financed and bound with the GMP construction contract from Tishman Construction.
So, we are currently 73% leases as we sit now.
And at this pace, we are on a trajectory to meet or exceed our year-end estimate of 85%.
