For the quarter, we posted organic sales growth of 9.3%, reflecting growth versus 2019 for all our major businesses.
International organic growth outpaced the U.S. at 14.2% despite COVID challenges in some countries.
With our first half organic growth of 7.1%, combined with continued recovery of electric procedures, a strong order book across our capital businesses and new product innovations, we have increased confidence in the full year outlook.
This is reflected in our upward narrowing of organic sales guidance to 9% to 10% compared to 2019.
Our sales performance carried through the rest of our results with strong margin performance and adjusted earnings per share growth and cash flow conversion of over 100% in the quarter.
Our bullish sales outlook, combined with ongoing execution on margins and continued progress on Wright Medical integration has resulted in a raised full year adjusted earnings per share guidance of $9.25 to $9.40 a share.
During the quarter, our combined worldwide Trauma and Extremities business, including Wright Medical had a strong performance, growing 7% compared to 2019.
The upper extremities performance in the quarter was enhanced by the continued adoption of our BLUEPRINT planning software with approximately 50% of total shoulder cases completed using BLUEPRINT.
As a result of the strong performance of our Trauma and Extremities business, which grew approximately 5% in the first half of the year, we are confident in the combined business to grow at least 6% for the full year when compared to 2019.
Our organic sales growth was 9.3% in the quarter.
Compared to 2019, pricing in the quarter was unfavorable, 0.6% versus Q2 2020, pricing was 5% unfavorable.
Foreign currency had a favorable 1.5% impact on sales.
For the quarter, U.S. organic sales increased by 7.5%, reflecting the recovery of our procedural business and continued strong demand for Mako, medical products and neurovascular products.
International organic sales showed strong growth of 14.2%.
Our adjusted quarterly earnings per share of $2.25 increased 13.6% from 2019, reflecting sales growth and operating margin expansion, partially offset by higher interest charges resulting from the Wright Medical acquisition and a somewhat higher quarterly effective tax rate.
Our second quarter earnings per share was positively impacted from foreign currency by $0.04.
Orthopaedics had constant currency sales growth of 26% and an organic sales growth of 6.7%, including an organic growth of 8% in the U.S.
Our knees business grew 7.5% in the U.S., reflecting the strong bounce back as the COVID-related restrictions were lifted.
Other Orthopaedics grew 26.5% in the U.S., primarily reflecting strong demand for our Mako robotic platform, partially offset by declines in bone cement.
Internationally, Orthopaedics grew 4% organically, which reflects sequential improvement as the COVID-19 impacts have started to ease in Europe, strong momentum in Mako internationally and strong performances in Australia.
For the quarter, our Trauma and Extremities business, which includes Wright Medical, delivered 7% growth on a comparable basis.
In the U.S., comparable growth was 12.5%, and which included double-digit growth in our Upper Extremities and Trauma businesses.
In the quarter, MedSurg had constant currency and organic sales growth of 8.3%, which included 6.4% growth in the U.S. Instruments had a U.S. organic sales growth of 0.9%, primarily related to growth in smoke evacuation, lighted instruments and skin closure products partially offset by slower growth in power tools.
As a reminder, during the second quarter of 2019, Instruments had a very strong growth of approximately 19%.
Endoscopy had U.S. organic sales growth of 6%, reflecting strong performances in our Sports Medicine, general surgery and video products.
The Medical division had U.S. organic growth of 13.4%, reflecting continued double-digit performance in our emergency care business.
Internationally, MedSurg had organic sales growth of 15.9% and reflecting strong growth in the Endoscopy, Instruments and Medical businesses across Europe, Canada and Australia.
Neurotechnology and Spine had organic growth of 15.5%.
It also reflects very strong growth in our neurovascular business of approximately 30%.
Our U.S. Neurotech business posted an organic growth of 17.3% and highlighted by strong product growth in Sonopet IQ, bipolar forceps, max space, cryotherapy and nasal implants.
Internationally, Neurotechnology and Spine had organic growth of 28.8%.
Our adjusted gross margin of 66% was a favorable approximately 15 basis points from second quarter 2019 compared to the second quarter in 2019, gross margin was primarily impacted by business mix and acquisitions, primarily offset by price.
Adjusted R&D spending was 6.6% of sales, reflecting our continued focus on innovation.
Our adjusted SG&A was 33.4% of sales, which was slightly better than the second quarter of 2019.
In summary, for the quarter, our adjusted operating margin was 25.9% of sales, which is five basis points improvement over the second quarter of 2019.
Based on our positive momentum, we continue to reiterate our op margin guidance for the year of 30 to 50 basis points improvement over 2019, excluding the impact of Wright Medical.
Our second quarter had an adjusted effective tax rate of 17% and was impacted by our mix of U.S. non-U.S. income and some adverse discrete tax items included in our provision to return adjustments.
Our year-to-date effective tax rate is 15.2%.
For the full year, we expect an adjusted effective tax rate of 15% to 15.5% with some variability in the remaining quarters, including a slightly lower rate in the third quarter and a more normalized rate in the fourth quarter.
Focusing on the balance sheet, we ended the first quarter with $2.3 billion of cash and marketable securities and total debt of $12.7 billion.
During the quarter, we fully repaid the $400 million of term loan debt related to the borrowings incurred for the acquisition of Wright Medical.
Year-to-date, we have paid down $1.15 billion of debt.
Our year-to-date cash from operations was approximately $1.3 billion.
Based on our performance in sales ramp in the second quarter as well as our capital orders pipeline, we expect 2021 organic net sales growth to be in the range of 9% to 10%.
As it relates to sales expectations for Wright Medical, we now expect comparable growth for Trauma and Extremities to be at least 6% for the full year when compared to the combined results for 2019.
If foreign currency exchange rates hold near current levels, we expect net sales in the full year will be positively impacted by approximately 1%.
Consistent with the upper range of our previous guidance, net earnings per diluted share will be positively impacted by foreign exchange by approximately $0.10 in the full year, and this is included in our revised guidance range.
Based on our performance in the first six months and including consideration of our improved full year Wright Medical performance impact, controlled spend ramp to facilitate growth and continued positive recovery outlook, we now expect adjusted net earnings per diluted share to be in the range of $9.25 to $9.40.
