We delivered sales growth of 11% and adjusted earnings-per-share growth of 21% year-over-year, demonstrating the strength and diversity of the portfolio and the benefits from our operational improvements.
We continue to demonstrate our strong cash generation model with our quarter-one free cash flow being at a first quarter record of approximately $530 million.
We continue to expect approximately 100% free cash flow conversion to adjusted net income for this fiscal year.
We expect sales and adjusted earnings per share, similar to the first quarter, at approximately $3.5 billion of revenue and a $1.47 in earnings per share.
In fiscal 2019, our content per vehicle in Auto was in the low 60s and it's now trending into the low 70 range.
Quarter-one sales of $3.5 billion were better than our expectations, up 11% on a reported basis and 6% organically year-over-year.
We had 12% organic growth in both Transportation and in Communications with growth across all businesses in those two segments.
Industrial segment sales were down 8% organically due to the COVID-related impacts I already talked about.
During the quarter, we saw orders of $4 billion and this was up 25% year-over-year, reflecting an improvement in the majority of the end markets we served and I'll come back to orders in a couple of slides.
From an earnings per share perspective, our adjusted earnings per share was $1.47.
This was up 21% year-over-year.
It is a strong operational performance where we showed adjusted operating income being up approximately 25% year-over-year.
For the second quarter, we expect sales to be approximately $3.5 billion and this is up approximately 10% year-over-year on a reported basis and mid-single digits organically.
Adjusted earnings per share is expected to be approximately $1.47 in the second quarter and this will be up 14% year-over-year with adjusted operating margin expansion included in the earnings performance.
For the first quarter, our orders will approximately $4 billion with a book-to-bill of 1.15.
In looking at orders by segment, on a year-over-year basis, Transportation and Communication orders both grew 36% with broad-based growth across all businesses.
In China, our orders were up 33% in the first quarter with growth, driven by Transportation and Communications.
We also saw 26% year-over-year growth in Europe, with growth in all segments.
Now, what I'd like to do is touch upon our segment results briefly and I'll cover those on Slide 5 through 7 of the slides we issued.
Starting with Transportation, our sales were up 12% organically year-over-year, with growth in each one of our businesses.
In Auto, sales were up 11% organically versus global auto production growth in the low single digits.
In our Commercial Transportation business, we saw 25% organic growth, driven by electronification trends, which are helping content outperformance as well as ongoing share gains.
We are also benefiting from higher emission standards and new increased operator adoption of Euro 5 and 6 in China and new emission standards in India.
In Sensors, we saw 29% growth on a reported basis, which included the revenue contribution from the First Sensor acquisition.
On an organic basis, sales increased 3%, driven by growth in auto applications and we continue to expand our design win pipeline in auto sensing and expect growth at these platforms continue to increase in volume.
From an operating margin perspective, the segment expanded margins by 200 basis points to 19.4%, driven by strong operational performance.
Now, let me move over to the Industrial segment, where, as I mentioned, our sales declined 8% organically year-over-year and our adjusted operating margins were down slightly to 13.5% despite the 8% organic sales decline.
During the quarter, the segment continued to be impacted by the decline in the commercial aerospace market, with our AD&M business declining 22% organically.
Our Industrial Equipment business was up 8% organically, with growth in all regions and strength in factory automation applications.
And lastly, in our Energy business, we saw a 4% organic decline, driven by COVID impact on utility spending, but we did see growth in renewable energy applications and the wind and solar applications.
Now, let me turn to the Communications segment, where our sales grew 12% organically year-over-year, with growth in both Data & Devices as well as appliances.
In Data & Devices, our sales grew 5% organically year-over-year due to the strong position we've built in high-speed solution for cloud applications.
And in Appliances, we grew 21% organically year-over-year, with growth across all regions and benefits from home investments and an improved housing market.
I would have to say, our Communication team continues to perform very well, delivering 17.6% adjusted operating margins, which is up 550 basis points versus the prior year.
Adjusted operating income was $624 million, up approximately 25% year-over-year with an adjusted operating margin of 17.7%.
GAAP operating income was $448 million and included $167 million of restructuring and other charges and $9 million of acquisition-related charges.
We plan for the restructuring to be front-end loaded this year and continue to expect total restructuring charges in the ballpark of $200 million for fiscal '21 as we continue to optimize our manufacturing footprint and improve the fixed cost structure of the organization.
Adjusted earnings per share was $1.47 and GAAP earnings per share was $1.13 for the quarter and included a tax-related benefit of $0.09.
We also had restructuring, acquisition and other charges of $0.43.
The adjusted effective tax rate in Q1 was approximately 20%.
For the second quarter, we expect our tax rate to be in the high teens and continue to expect an effective tax rate of around 19% for fiscal '21.
Currency exchange rates positively impacted sales by $106 million versus the prior year.
We are demonstrating our business model execution with adjusted earnings per share of $1.47, up 21% year-over-year.
Adjusted operating margins were 17.7% as I mentioned earlier, and that is an expansion of 190 basis points versus prior year.
Transportation adjusted operating margin was 19.4%, which is nearing our business model target of 20%.
I'm also very pleased with the 17.6% adjusted operating margin in Communication, which reflects our strong operational execution that I mentioned earlier.
In the quarter, cash from continuing operations was $640 million and we have very strong cash flow for the quarter of approximately $530 million, which represents a first-quarter record, as Terrence mentioned.
And we returned $286 million to shareholders through dividend and share repurchases.
Our strong cash flow performance last year and into the first quarter of this year demonstrates the strength of our cash generation model and we continue to expect free cash flow conversion to approximately 100% for the full year.
