Net income for the second quarter of 2020 included net after-tax realized investment gains of $25.4 million and an after-tax impairment loss of $10 million on the right-of-use asset related to one of our operating leases on an office building, we do not plan to continue to occupy.
Net income in the second quarter of 2019 included a net after-tax realized investment loss of $5.7 million.
As a reminder, net realized investment gains and losses include changes in the fair value of an embedded derivative in a modified coinsurance arrangement, which resulted in an after-tax realized gain of $33.1 million in the second quarter of 2020 and an after-tax realized investment loss of $600,000 in the year ago quarter.
Therefore, the net after-tax realized investment loss from sales and credit losses totaled $7.7 million in the second quarter of 2020.
So excluding these items, after-tax adjusted operating income in the second quarter of 2020 was $250.1 million or $1.23 per diluted common share compared to $286.9 million or $1.36 per diluted common share in the year ago quarter.
Adjusted operating earnings per share were $1.23, which is down from the $1.36 of the year ago second quarter, but was solid overall given the headwinds of the market.
We continue to see growth in premiums, which were up 1.7%, while underlying business origination was more mixed.
Unum US Total sales declined just under 3%.
International sales increased just over 1%, while Colonial Life sales declined 43%, reflecting the challenges of face-to-face sales.
We expect premium income for our core business segments to be flat to a slight increase for full year 2020 after increasing just over 2% in the first half.
In fact, what we saw was that death rates were similar to our overall non-COVID age distribution, negatively affecting our U.S. group life block and our other life insurance blocks within our voluntary benefits businesses and the U.K. On the other hand, higher mortality drove significantly higher claim terminations in the long-term care block resulting in the interest adjusted loss ratio of 67%, which is well below historical trends.
Our capital metrics remained solid with RBC at approximately 370% and holding company cash of $1.6 billion.
We estimate that COVID produced a net unfavorable impact to our claims experience of between $12 million and $16 million, with the biggest unfavorable impacts occurring within Unum US group life the overall Unum UK results and the Closed Disability Block.
The second category covers impacts to net investment income and the investment portfolio, which we estimate in the range of $24 million to $28 million unfavorable.
In all, these items produced an unfavorable impact in the high $40 million to $50 million range on a before-tax basis for the second quarter.
Adjusted operating income declined 9% to $231.9 million, primarily reflecting adverse mortality impacts from COVID-19 on the group life business, along with higher expenses in our leave management operation.
Premium growth for Unum US in the second quarter was 1.2% year-over-year, which is a slightly lower trend than we have seen in recent quarters.
The current sales environment remains challenging, declining by 2.9% in total for the segment.
As we expected, we saw better sales results in the large case market for group products with those sales advancing 9.5% compared to a decline of 3.6% for sales of core market group products using 2,000 lives as a dividing line.
Claims trends for Unum US showed a wide range of results in the second quarter, but the benefit ratio for this segment was generally consistent year-over-year at 68.1% compared to 67.6% in the year ago quarter, reflecting our broad diversification within the employee benefits market.
The group disability line continue to show strong performance producing an improved benefit ratio of 72.8% in the quarter compared to 74.7% last year, driven by strong claim recoveries.
This pushed the benefit ratio significantly lower to 36% from 71.6% last year.
The group life and AD&D line had a sharp decline in adjusted operating income to $19.4 million in the quarter from $62.7 million a year ago as the benefit ratio increased significantly to 81.8% in the quarter from last year's 72.9%, predominantly driven by COVID-19-related mortality.
We experienced an increase in the number of paid claims this quarter by approximately 12% or slightly over 900 excess claims, along with an increase in the average claim size by approximately 7%.
In addition, at the end of the second quarter, we estimated an additional number of incurred but not reported COVID claims leading to an increase in the IBNR reserve balance for group life of $7 million.
To put this into perspective, the total impact to the quarter was approximately 1,100 excess life claims above our quarterly average, which is slightly less than 1% of the approximately 120,000 COVID-19 deaths reported by Johns Hopkins in the second quarter.
The Colonial Life segment produced very good earnings this quarter with adjusted operating earnings of $90.9 million, an increase of 7.7% over the year ago quarter.
Premium income increased 4.2% as persistency held up well, offsetting the decline we are seeing in new sales activity.
This quarter, new sales declined by 43%, reflecting the challenges of selling and enrolling in what has traditionally been a face-to-face sales environment.
The benefit ratio was slightly lower at 50.7% compared to 51.4% a year ago as improved results in accident, sickness and disability and cancer and critical illness offset the incrementally higher mortality we experienced in the business.
Results in our Unum International segment remained weak this quarter with adjusted operating income of $15.1 million compared to $30.7 million a year ago.
Additionally, like our U.S. group life trends, we experienced higher mortality in the U.K. group life block, which represents a little less than 20% of the overall U.K. business.
Premium income, however, did increase in both Unum UK, up 1.9%; and Unum Poland, up 11.1%, both in local currency.
The Closed Block segment produced a very good quarter with adjusted operating income increasing almost 9% to $36.7 million.
In total, net investment income for the Closed Block segment declined 8% in the second quarter to $326.3 million.
Along with these higher potential returns over the long-term income volatility in quarterly investment income, that was evident this quarter with a negative market value adjustment on these investments of $31.3 million reflecting market values at March 31, which are reported on a lagged basis.
To put this in perspective, in 2019, we reported average quarterly positive marks of approximately $8 million a quarter.
Therefore, there is a positive market value adjustment of $10 million in the second quarter compared to the $17 million negative adjustment in the first quarter.
The second quarter interest adjusted loss ratio dropped to 67%, bringing the rolling four quarters ratio to 81.1%, well below the expected range of 85% to 90%.
The favorable results were primarily driven by elevated claim mortality, which was approximately 30% higher than average this quarter.
Given the uncertainty of the timing of future claim filings, as a result of the pandemic, we did increase the incurred but not recorded reserve for long-term care by an incremental $20 million in the quarter.
Also related to LTC, we made further progress this quarter with several new rate increase approvals on in-force business, and now we're at 65% of our $1.4 billion reserve assumption.
The Closed Disability Block experienced an increase in the interest adjusted loss ratio to 89.5% in the quarter from 81.3% a year ago, driven primarily by higher submitted incidents.
A few points to highlight are: first, net after-tax realized investment losses from sales and credit losses declined to $7.7 million in the second quarter from $44.4 million in the first quarter of this year.
Second, downgrades of investment-grade securities to high-yield totaled $193 million for the second quarter compared to $336 million in the first quarter.
You'll recall, we previously referenced $119 million of downgrades that occurred in April.
The increase in second quarter downgrades created a minimal $11 million increase to required capital, which impacted the second quarter RBC ratio by only one point.
And then third, the net unrealized gain position on the fixed maturity securities portfolio improved to $7.4 billion in the second quarter from $4.3 billion at the end of the first quarter.
Within that, the Energy Holdings, which do total 9.2% of our fixed maturity securities moved to a net unrealized gain position of $437 million from a net unrealized loss of $350 million, a significant improvement in values due to spread tightening, given the recovery in economic and oil prices.
In the first quarter, we outlined an investment credit scenario for defaults and downgrades of investment-grade securities to high-yield for 2020, that assumed as a base case $85 million of defaults and $1.6 billion of downgrades.
Our capital forecast now includes $70 million of defaults and $1.3 billion of downgrades in 2020, including what we have already experienced.
We finished the second quarter in very good shape with the risk-based capital ratio for our traditional U.S. insurance companies at approximately 370%, above the 350 targeted level and holding company cash at $1.6 billion.
We target maintaining holding company cash at greater than 1 times our fixed obligations, which is approximately $400 million.
During the second quarter, we issued $500 million of debt.
And as a reminder, we have a $400 million debt maturity in September.
In addition, an important driver of our capital position is after-tax statutory operating earnings in our traditional and U.S. insurance companies, which were quite strong again in the second quarter, totaling $327 million compared to $278 million in the year ago quarter.
