As we've discussed in the past, our two largest markets, Hawaii and Orlando, which combined represent more than 40% of our North American keys were slower to recover in the first quarter.
But both of these markets showed substantial improvement this quarter with Hawaii running over 90% occupancy and Orlando running more than 85% with both locations either in line or exceeding June 2019 levels.
Our Florida Beach and U.S. Virgin Island resorts averaged 95% for the quarter, each above 2019.
And our Mountain and Desert resorts were nearly 90% during the quarter, well above 2019 levels.
Even our urban locations saw a substantial improvement as the quarter progressed, with San Diego with Boston exceeding 85% occupancy for the month of June.
With the strong improvement in occupancies, we grew contract sales by 60% on a sequential basis, and we were only 6% below pre-pandemic levels.
First-time buyers represented more than 30% of second quarter contract sales, up more than 500 basis points from the first quarter, which is very encouraging.
This was clearly evident in our VPG this quarter, which was more than $1,000 or 30% higher than 2019 with the improvement coming from both first-time buyers and owners.
Interval exchange transactions were down sequentially due to normal seasonality but we're only down 1% compared to the second quarter of 2019, and average revenue per member was up 7% from two years ago.
Today, 60% of points reservations are being made online, and I expect that to continue to grow in the future.
In our exchange and third-party management segment, nearly 60% of Interval's exchange and getaway transactions have been done online this year, and we expect that to continue to grow.
While still early days, short-term getaways represented more than 5% of the total second quarter rentals, and we're finding a lot of members using short-term getaways as a way to extend their stay beyond the week, which is a new incremental usage case.
Occupancies were at or above 2019 levels in the second quarter at a number of locations, while roughly 45% of our North American sales centers exceeded their 2019 levels in June.
We sold 60% more tour packages in the second quarter than we did in the first quarter and ended June with more than 200,000 tours in our package pipeline, which is a positive leading indicator for future contract sales.
We currently have 16% more owner and preview reservations on the books for the second half of this year than we did at the same time in 2019, and bookings already for next year are very strong.
For example, over 47 million Americans traveled over the July four weekend with Orlando topping the list of destinations.
42% of households say they are better off financially than they were a year ago and 45% feel now is a good time to spend money on leisure travel.
Three out of four of our owners say they are ready to travel in the next 90 days, while over 90% of interval members surveyed said they plan to travel in the second half of the year.
We grew contract sales by 60% compared to the first quarter to $362 million, including $31 million from Welk.
Development profit was $65 million in the quarter, and margin was 22% despite $13 million of negative reportability, which we don't adjust when reporting results.
Excluding revenue reportability, adjusted development profit more than doubled on a sequential basis to $81 million, and more importantly, margin was 26%, approximately 240 basis points above 2019.
Revenues increased 43% sequentially with growth coming from both higher transient keys rented and revenue per available key.
As a result, we reported $15 million of rental profit in the quarter.
Resort management profit increased $18 million sequentially, driven primarily by the substantial improvement in our ancillary business, which was nearly back to 2019 levels and the inclusion of Welk this quarter.
And financing profit increased 20% compared to the first quarter, primarily due to the inclusion of Welk.
However, I did want to highlight that the vacation ownership results I just discussed included $12 million from Welk better than we anticipated.
As a result, total adjusted EBITDA in our Vacation Ownership segment increased sequentially to $182 million, 90% of the EBITDA that we delivered in the second quarter of 2019.
As expected, adjusted EBITDA declined $4 million compared to the first quarter.
In fact, Interval added 20% more new members than it did in Q1, and we continue to work hard to add more resort affiliations to the system.
After adjusting for share-based compensation expense and certain pandemic-related expenses, corporate G&A expense increased $7 million -- $17 million sequentially primarily related to reinstating our variable compensation plans as well as the inclusion of Welk.
In total, adjusted EBITDA more than doubled in the quarter on a sequential basis to $164 million, with margin approaching our second quarter 2019, even with lower revenue, demonstrating the strength of our business model, the recovery and leisure travel and the benefits of our synergy initiatives.
We ended the quarter with incremental run rate synergy savings of approximately $150 million, taking us closer to our goal of at least $200 million, which we expect to achieve by early next year.
In June, we issued $500 million of 4.5% senior notes due 2029 to refinance our 6.5% senior notes due in 2026, extending our maturity profile and saving us $10 million a year.
Pro forma for those transactions, we ended the quarter with $780 million of cash and total liquidity of nearly $1.5 billion including gross notes receivable eligible for securitization of $97 million.
After adjusting for the July debt repayment, we had $4.8 billion of debt outstanding at the end of the quarter comprised of $3 billion of corporate debt and $1.8 billion of nonrecourse debt related to our securitized notes receivable.
We are currently evaluating exiting the covenant waiver under our revolving credit facility early as well as a combination of repaying some of the $1 billion of debt we issued since the pandemic began and returning cash to shareholders.
As a result, we expect contract sales to grow to between $380 million and $410 million in the third quarter, up around 9% at the midpoint and roughly in line to slightly above third quarter 2019 contract sales.
As a result, while we do expect adjusted EBITDA to grow sequentially in the third quarter, these factors could keep us from getting all the way back to the $190 million of adjusted EBITDA we generated in Q3 2019.
Finally, while we're not providing free cash flow guidance today, with more than $650 million of excess inventory, I would expect our adjusted EBITDA to adjusted free cash flow conversion to be well above our normal 55% range for a number of years.
