These businesses were able to utilize retail inventories and leverage ship from store capabilities when the stores were forced to shut down, supporting an 80% increase in digital revenue.
Phase 2 of this project is currently under way with the plan to go live in the coming months, including save the sale functionality, which will allow our brands to leverage retail inventory when an item is out of stock online.
Vans revenue continued to sequentially improve declining 8% as 48% growth in Digital was more than offset by brick and mortar store reclosures in the Americas and EMEA markets.
The brand accelerated to 9% growth in APAC, led by 58% digital growth and 20% growth in China.
Vans ranked number one among the largest brands during the Singles' Day on Tmall getting 700,000 new consumers.
Also in November Vans customs launched on Tmall becoming the first global brand offering a full customization engine on this platform, the collaboration with Dave drove the launch generating 870,000 unique visitors on the customer site that day.
The Vans family member base continues to grow globally with membership approaching 14 million consumers.
Revenue declined 2% with continued sequential improvement in the Americas and double-digit growth in Europe and Asia.
Europe remains a bright spot for the brand with 17% growth, including a 112% digital growth, offsetting the impact of significant store closures in the region.
Global TNF digital increased 61% with accelerated growth across all regions driving a return to positive growth in D2C.
In North America, the VIP loyalty program drew 40,000 sign ups, a more than 90% increase versus last year.
Core off mountain icons such as the New-C [Phonetic] franchise performed well and the TNF Gucci Ecolab generated tremendous brand energy with over 15 billion media impressions since its December launch.
Yes, you heard that right over 15 billion media impressions since its December launch.
On a reported basis, we now expect fiscal 2021 revenue for the North Face to declined less than 10% including greater than 20% growth during the fourth quarter.
Timberland revenue declined 17% relative strength from apparel and positive growth in both outdoor footwear and the pro-business were more than offset by softness in classic footwear, which was significantly impacted by limited inventory availability.
The new work Summit boot was launched this quarter contributing to record traffic to Timberland pros digital site, which saw more than a 100% growth.
Dickies revenue increased 7% with strong demand across all regions and growth across all channels.
Brand interest accelerated in the quarter-over-indexed toward the key 18 to 24-year-old consumer demographic supported by the United by Dickies global campaign and focus on the brands icon stories.
As you would expect we will take great care as we move through the transition process during the next 12 to 18 months.
As announced on December 28, we closed the acquisition for an aggregate purchase price of approximately $2.1 billion subject to customary adjustments.
We expect Supreme to contribute about $125 million of revenue and $0.05 of adjusted earnings to the fourth quarter of fiscal 2021.
As disclosed that announcement, we expect Supreme to contribute at least $500 million of revenue and at least $0.20 of adjusted earnings in fiscal 2022.
Despite continued traffic headwinds our Americas business sequentially improved with nearly 50% digital growth offset by store closure headwinds.
VF EMEA digital business grew more than 80% in the quarter despite half of our brick and mortar stores being closed for a large portion of the quarter, the EMEA region, saw a meaningful sequential improvement and returned to positive growth on a reported basis.
Our Mainland China business grew 15% led by strength at Vans which grew 21%.
The D2C business in Mainland China accelerated to percent growth led by 24% growth in digital.
We're excited by the continued momentum in China and have high confidence in our outlook of 20% growth this year.
Total VF revenue declined 8% in line with our expectations.
International declined 4% as a 4% decline in EMEA was offset by 1% growth in APAC, including 11% growth in Greater China.
Our D2C business also declined 4% driven by store closures and continued soft traffic in the Americas and EMEA.
Our digital business grew 49% with strong performance across virtually every brand in the portfolio.
We now expect D2C digital revenue growth to exceed 50% for fiscal 2021 on a reported basis and including our digital wholesale business, we expect total digital penetration to approach 30% for the year.
Gross margin contracted 150 basis points to 57%, the third consecutive quarter of sequential improvement aided by moderating promotional activity.
The decline versus last year was primarily driven by higher levels of promotion and 90 basis points from FX transaction partially offset by 90 basis points of favorable mix benefit, while the promotional environment remains a headwind, it has slightly better than our expectations.
Our SG&A spending decline about 4% relative to last year as we return to more normalized levels of strategic investment spending, including demand creation, approaching historical levels of investment.
Inventories were down 14% at the end of the third quarter, consistent with our prior expectations.
We ended Q3 with approximately $3.9 billion of cash and short-term investments in addition to roughly $2 billion remaining undrawn on our revolver.
After funding the Supreme acquisition, we expect to exit fiscal 2021 with more than $1.5 billion in cash and nearly $2 billion remaining undrawn on our revolver.
We are raising our fiscal 2021 outlook and now expect full-year revenue to be between $9.1 billion and $9.2 billion and full-year earnings per share of approximately $1.30.
We're also raising our free cash flow outlook to approximately $650 million.
