Over the past five years, we have strategically evolved and simplified our portfolio from 32 brands to 12 brands, each with significant D2C and international opportunity, squarely focused on large, growing addressable markets.
The macro trends around outdoor and active lifestyles, health and wellness, casualization and sustainability have only strengthened over the past 20 months and our current portfolio is well-positioned to benefit from these accelerating tailwinds.
I'll start with Vans, which delivered 7% growth in Q2 despite meaningful wholesale shipments pushed into Q3, representing sequential improvement in underlying demand despite a more challenging than anticipated operating environment.
Our retail associates are driving best-in-class conversion, up 20% relative to pre-pandemic peaks this quarter in the Americas.
So despite a more challenging operating backdrop than anticipated, we are able to hold on to the low end of our prior outlook for Vans and now expect 7% to 9% growth relative to fiscal 2020.
The September Vans Horror collection launch supported the fifth highest sales day on record for our Americas DTC digital business achieving a 100% sell-through within days.
We are encouraged by the ongoing strength from Progression Footwear lines, up 15% relative to fiscal 2020 led by UltraRange and MTE and are pleased with the continued growth in Vans Family membership reaching 18.5 million consumers globally.
Starting with The North Face, which delivered 29% growth in Q2 despite significant wholesale shipments pushed into Q3, representing a sharp acceleration of underlying demand alongside meaningful margin improvement.
Off-Mountain lifestyle apparel and equipment are delivering outsized growth as strong 365-day demand persisted led by Logowear, Apex and [Indecipherable].
We are raising the outlook for TNF to 27% to 29% growth in fiscal 2022.
This will be a $3 billion business, delivering high-teen growth relative to fiscal 2020 levels, with strong margin expansion underway.
Moving on to Dickies, which continues to build upon its incredible run, delivering 19% growth in the quarter.
Icons have been a focus for the marketing and sales teams and the results are compelling, highlighted by the accelerated growth of the 874 Work Pant.
There are several versions of this 50-year-old icon, supported by ongoing innovation, which collectively have delivered over 100% growth year-to-date.
We are raising the outlook for Dickies to at least 20% growth in fiscal '22, representing at least 30% growth relative to fiscal '20.
We expect the brand will approach $1 billion next year as Dickies celebrates its 100-year anniversary.
Next, Timberland delivered 25% growth in Q2, despite significant wholesale shipments pushed into Q3, representing an acceleration of underlying demand over the quarter.
Despite historically low inventory levels, core boots and outdoor footwear continue to show strength as we head into the holiday, each growing over 40% in Q2.
The Solar Ridge Hiker launched with much fanfare in New York City and posted 50% sell-through in North America.
This group collectively represents nearly $550 million in revenue for the mid-to-high-teen growth profile longer term.
The Smartwool brand is up nearly 60% [Phonetic] year-to-date, representing high-teens growth relative to fiscal 2020.
The brand has grown nearly 30% year-to-date with balanced growth across its largest markets in Europe and the U.S. Base layers, tees and underwear represent about 70% of icebreaker global revenue confirming the consumer appeal of a 100% natural product in next-to-skin categories.
Through the first half of the year, the brand has grown over 60% relative to fiscal 2020 and we expect this to accelerate into the back half of the year as the brand continues to expand its presence in road running with innovative new styles and designs.
As a result, I'm proud of our ability to hold on to our fiscal 2022 earnings outlook of about $3.20 despite a more challenging than anticipated operating environment, including an incremental headwind of about $0.09 from expedited freight.
However, the region was able to deliver 22% organic growth in Q2, representing continued sequential underlying improvement.
Due to VF's large and strategically diversified sourcing footprint, our overall production capacity has remained better positioned than most with about 85% of production operational throughout the quarter.
Pressures have generally concentrated in the southern region of Vietnam, which represents about 10% of VF's overall sourcing mix.
In aggregate, supply delays are pervasive and, in some cases, have extended 8 weeks to 10 weeks.
For example, the Supreme brand has experienced around 30% less inventory around drops.
Total VF revenue increased 21% to $3.2 billion despite a significant amount of orders shifted from Q2 into Q3, implying continued sequential underlying improvement for the portfolio.
Our adjusted gross margin expanded 300 basis points to 53.9% due to higher full price realization, lower markdowns, favorable mix and around 20 basis points contribution from Supreme.
When compared to prior peak gross margins in fiscal 2020, our current year gross margin was impacted by about 180 basis points headwind from incremental expedited freight and FX.
Excluding these two items, our organic gross margin in Q2 is over 100 basis points above prior peak levels, driven by favorable mix and strong underlying margin rate improvement.
Our SG&A ratio improved in Q2, down 100 basis points organically to 37.2% despite elevated distribution spend and continued growth in strategic investments.
This strong underlying leverage was driven by discretionary choices and is a clear reflection of the optionality within our model, supporting organic earnings per share growth of 60%.
I'm proud of our team's ability to deliver earnings of $1.11 in Q2 despite incremental expedited freight expense and significant wholesale shipment timing headwinds in the quarter, reflecting the strong underlying earnings momentum of the portfolio.
We are holding our revenue guidance to be about $12 billion despite a weaker China outlook in the near term and a lower than expected back-to-school performance at Vans in the U.S. and ongoing supply chain challenges; all of this, highlighting the broad-based strength across our brands and geographies.
Our gross margin outlook is now about 56%, including 40 basis points of incremental freight cost relative to what we had expected in July, implying an improving underlying gross margin outlook.
And adjusting for incremental freight and FX, our fiscal 2022 outlook implies over 100 basis points of underlying gross margin expansion relative to peak gross margins in fiscal 2020, driven by favorable mix and clean full price sell-through.
We are holding our operating margin outlook to around 13% for fiscal 2022 despite the incremental freight cost covered.
Finally, as discussed, we are reaffirming our full year earnings outlook of around $3.20 despite about $0.09 of incremental costs directly attributed to the supply chain disruption; a strong testament of portfolio resiliency and the optionality of our model.
