Ellen will go into greater detail on our financial results, but briefly, revenue for the quarter was $9.8 million with an adjusted EBITDA loss of $9.1 million, which was $3.1 million ahead of the same period in the prior year.
And based on the reporting we've seen industrywide, the economy segment of the hotel industry performed at roughly 83% of 2019 RevPAR levels.
In contrast, our lodging properties in Jasper outperformed the North American market with strong RevPAR performance in Q1 at 98% of 2019.
Consumer confidence index improved dramatically in March of '21, climbing from 90 to 109.
In a typical March, we take between 300 and 450 bookings per week for Alaska.
Bookings for the '21 season in Alaska are pacing between 700 and 1,300 per week, and this strong booking pace has continued all the way through April.
It's located 90 minutes west of Banff and surrounded by five national and provincial parks, and opens to the public in early June.
We're pleased to announce today that we've broken ground on the construction of a new 88-room hotel in Jasper that will sit between two of our existing properties, the Marmot Lodge and the Sawridge Resort and Conference Center.
This new hotel project also allows us to bring 54 employee housing beds online through the reconfiguration of some existing lodging product, helping our colleagues in Jasper live in affordable and safe housing.
Vegas returns to 100% capacity in June and we're also pleased to report that we've completed the filming of the main feature, FlyOver the real Wild West, and are now in the post-production phase.
Las Vegas is a strong and viable destination 12 months a year and we cannot wait to be open.
And recently, Las Vegas, the world's largest event market, announced that the city would start hosting large-scale exhibitions at 100% capacity starting in June.
We've also permanently reduced our annual fixed cost base by about $10 million by exiting and downsizing facilities.
In total, we exited 21 leased facilities across our warehouse and office network during 2020.
During the first quarter, we were able to shrink our Las Vegas warehouse footprint by about 100,000 square feet as a direct result of outsourcing our carpet depot, streamlining our service offering and reducing our office requirements.
We also completed a sale-leaseback transaction of our Orlando area production facility, which freed up about $14 million in capital.
We've onboarded more than 30 new corporate clients over the past year and continue to see very strong RFP opportunities.
At GES, we realized revenue of $19.1 million as we supported our clients primarily with virtual and hybrid events, while face-to-face events remained largely shut down.
This was down approximately 93% from the 2020 first quarter.
GES adjusted segment EBITDA was negative $14.2 million and included a $9.1 million gain from the sale of our final GES owned warehouse as we continue to free up capital and shift to a more flexible cost structure across GES.
Primarily in connection with that downsizing, we recorded a restructuring charge of $2.8 million at GES during the quarter.
At Pursuit, we experienced a smaller year-over-year revenue decline of approximately 28% as we drew visitors from our local and regional markets, while international travel remained restricted during this seasonally slow quarter.
Pursuit's first quarter revenue was $9.8 million and adjusted segment EBITDA was negative $9.1 million.
As David mentioned earlier, Pursuit's adjusted segment EBITDA improved by $3.1 million year-over-year despite lower revenue.
This was largely the result of vigilant cost control and approximately $2 million in wage subsidies offered by the Canadian government.
Our net loss attributable to Viad was $43.2 million for the quarter and our net loss before other items was $39 million, which excludes restructuring charges, attraction start-up costs, acquisition integration and transaction-related costs, and other nonrecurring expenses as applicable.
During the quarter, our total available liquidity decreased by approximately $40 million, which included funding for the development of Pursuit's FlyOver Las Vegas attraction and Pursuit's acquisition of the new Golden Skybridge attraction.
We had previously guided for a decrease of $45 million to $50 million.
We limited our operating cash outflow to approximately $33 million for the quarter, and our capital expenditures totaled $9.4 million and were mainly at Pursuit for the FlyOver Las Vegas attraction.
Additionally, we raised net proceeds of $14.1 million from the sale of a GES warehouse and acquired the new Golden Skybridge attraction for Pursuit for $7.2 million net of cash acquired.
We ended the first quarter with total available liquidity of approximately $220 million, including unrestricted cash of approximately $35 million, capacity on our revolving credit facility of approximately $140 million and an additional $45 million available to us through a delayed draw commitment from Crestview Partners.
At March 31, 2021, our debt totaled approximately $370 million, including approximately $301 million drawn on our revolving credit facility, financing leases of approximately $63 million and approximately $6 million in debt at our FlyOver Iceland attraction.
And as a reminder, during this covenant waiver period, we are required to maintain minimum liquidity of $100 million.
Based on our level of bookings at Pursuit and GES, we currently expect our operating cash outflow will flow to somewhere in the range of $20 million to $25 million for the second quarter, down from a $33 million outflow last quarter.
Additionally, we expect to spend approximately $20 million in capital expenditures, including growth capex for FlyOver Las Vegas, the Golden Skybridge and our new hotel in Jasper, which brings our total expected cash outflow for the quarter to $40 million to $45 million.
This would leave us with total available liquidity of at least $175 million at June 30.
