We're particularly pleased with our lodging business in Jasper, and during the fourth quarter the seven properties delivered nearly 27,000 room nights and so our year-over-year increase in average daily rates at multiple properties.
Switching gears to FlyOver attractions at FlyOver Canada and Vancouver, the new Halloween contest that we launched in October was met with positive guest reviews driving a 50% increase from our internal forecast for October visitation and increased net promoter score of 16 points from the prior month.
Teams around the world rose to the occasion to weather the worst of the pandemic and supported each other through these challenging times whether leveraging our food and beverage operations to deliver nearly 20,000 community meals or the personal sacrifice made by many team members through temporary wage reduction.
We're seeing strength in rate growth for our cabins and RV site products, both of which are trending 10% to 15% ahead of the same period last year.
We are disappointed to learn this week of the Canadian government's ban on cruise ships over 100 passengers from its waters for the '21 season, which will have some impact on business in Alaska.
And I'll stress it's still very early days and that our sample size is small, but we remain enthusiastic about how we're trending for the first quarter of '21 as recent weekend occupancies have eclipsed 90%.
Recently featured in Conde Nast Traveller, Sky Lagoon is one of the largest tourism projects in Iceland history featuring a geothermal spot with a 260 foot Infinity edge overlooking the Atlantic Ocean all within minutes of Downtown Reykjavik.
In a year that we would normally be bustling to service over 4,000 global events, we were presented with an opportunity to accelerate some important strategic goals, growth in our corporate business and margin improvement within our exhibition business.
As an established and trusted partner in this space, we continue to expand our corporate client roster with the addition of new corporate clients like Boomi, a Dell company, Temenos, 10 Genomics, Tetra Pak, AM General, Hartz Mountain, Wylo and the London Stock Exchange.
Through facility rationalizations, we reduced our annual fixed cost by about $10 million and we've scaled back our semi-variable cost by about 70% in response to the current revenue environment.
In total, we exited 21 leased facilities across our warehouse and office network during 2020, and we sold our San Diego area production warehouse.
Last month, we completed a sale leaseback transaction for our final GES-owned facility located in the Orlando market and received about $14 million in cash proceeds.
We raised approximately $47 million in cash proceeds from the disposition of certain assets including $25 million in May, related to the cash surrender value of life insurance policies and $17 million in July from the sale of a GES warehouse that we vacated in connection with our facility downsizing efforts.
In early August, we announced that we secured a $180 million investment from the private equity firm Crestview Partners, which made the initial investment of $135 million in newly issued perpetual convertible preferred stock with the delayed draw commitment of up to an additional $45 million.
These critical actions have bolstered our financial position and protecting our future with total available liquidity at the end of the year of approximately $260 million, including cash, revolver capacity and the delayed draw commitment from Crestview Partners.
We ended the year with debt of $296.4 million, primarily on our revolving credit facility and cash of $39.5 million.
And as a reminder, during this covenant waiver period, we are required to maintain minimum liquidity of $100 million as of December 31, 2020.
At GES, we realized revenue of $18.7 million as we supported our clients' primarily with virtual and hybrid events during the pandemic.
This was down approximately 93% from the 2019 fourth quarter largely as a result of face-to-face event cancellations and postponements.
GES adjusted segment EBITDA, which excluded a non-cash restructuring related inventory write-up of $5.3 million to transform the carpet depot to an outsourcing model was negative $22.8 million.
At Pursuit, we experienced a smaller year-over-year revenue decline of approximately 58% as we were able to drive visitors from our local and regional markets while international travel remained restricted.
Pursuit's fourth quarter revenue was $9.2 million and adjusted segment EBITDA was negative $7.4 million.
And net loss attributable to Viad was $50.5 million for the quarter, and our net loss before other items was $42.8 million, which excludes restructuring-related charges, attraction start-up costs and other non-recurring expenses as applicable.
In total, our liquidity position decreased by approximately $50 million during the quarter, which included funding for Pursuit's new FlyOver Las Vegas attraction that is scheduled to open in the third quarter.
We limited our operating cash outflow to approximately $38 million for the quarter, which is about $13 million per month.
And our capital expenditures totaled approximately $13.5 million and were mainly at Pursuit for the FlyOver Las Vegas attraction.
With that backdrop, we expect our operating cash burn to approximate $45 million to $50 million for the quarter.
We expect to spend about $15 million on capital projects primarily on the continued development of Pursuit's FlyOver Las Vegas attraction, which will mostly be offset by proceeds of approximately $14 million received during January 2021, from the sale of a GES warehouse located in the Orlando area.
With our total available liquidity at year end of approximately $260 million and the first quarter estimated outflows, we expect our pro forma liquidity position at the end of the 2021 first quarter to be approximately $210 million or more.
But even if we assume there is no improvement relative to what we are currently experiencing, we expect a sufficient liquidity above our bank required $100 million minimum level.
We are fortunate to have a solid liquidity position with the ability to selectively invest in compelling growth opportunities at Pursuit, including approximately $20 million to complete FlyOver Las Vegas and minimal start up capital to complete Sky Lagoon for their planned 2021 opening date.
