That growth dynamic has never been more evident than today, and I'm very pleased to announce that in the third quarter, Pursuit delivered revenue of $118 million, adjusted EBITDA of $60 million and adjusted EBITDA margins of 51%.
Ellen will go into more detail shortly, but for the quarter, Pursuit adjusted EBITDA increased $39.9 million or 202% from the same period in 2020 and reached new records in our Alaska and Montana geographies.
In Seward, our Kenai Fjords tours business, saw revenue grow 14% from 2019 on a 9% increase in passengers and a 5% increase in effective ticket price, as guests and search of glaciers and humpback whales rebounded significantly from 2020.
Across our five Alaskan hotels, we saw strong demand from the Lower 48 and maintained outstanding guest feedback scores despite a very challenging labor market.
Average daily rates were up 6% from 2019 and 32% from 2020.
Net promoter scores at our West Glacier RV Park and Cabin Village achieved an impressive 77.2 and hotel RevPAR increased versus 2019 at seven of nine Glacier Park properties on a same-store basis.
And average daily rates increased 8% from 2019.
Retail results in Glacier continue to be absolutely remarkable as third quarter revenue was up $12.4 million, with 76% ahead of 2020 and 34% ahead of our previous record we set in 2019.
In Jasper, a relentless focus on guest experience helped drive significant improvement in hotel net promoter scores, enabling us to increase average daily rates 22% above the 2019 levels, leading to record third quarter EBITDA.
The attraction was sold out for the majority of August, resulting in a 143% year-over-year increase in ride passengers.
Our revenue management efforts drove a 26% year-over-year increase to effective ticket prices and ancillary revenue per passenger nearly tripled from 2019.
In Reykjavik, FlyOver Iceland benefited from the beginning of the tourism recovery in Iceland as international guest arrivals into the Keflavik Airport rebounded to approximately 60% of 2019 Q3 levels.
Pursuit's newest FlyOver attraction, FlyOver Las Vegas, opened successfully on September one and has received overwhelmingly positive reviews, with an average rating of 4.5 stars across the review platforms.
In Vegas, we're again seeing the power of diversified attraction content as 45% of our guests to-date have purchased a dual feature ticket, combining the FlyOver The Real Wild West experience with FlyOver Iceland.
80% of Golden locals have purchased a season's pass, and that shows really strong demand and a high level of interest from our local community.
The guest response has been outstanding with 4.7 stars out of five on Google, and we're pleased to have seen an increasing number of international guest throughout the quarter as Iceland has opened its borders and international visitation has increased.
First, in the Canadian Rockies, construction is well underway on the new 88-room hotel in Jasper, which we expect to open to the public in early summer 2022.
The third quarter was a turning point for GES, with revenue improving from accelerated event activity to $116 million, more than four times the revenue in the second quarter and about half of the revenue in the 2019 pre-pandemic third quarter.
We successfully produced over 250 events during the quarter in geographies around the world, including MINExpo in Las Vegas, Association of United States Army event in Washington, D.C., the National Safety Council in Orlando, Gastech in Dubai, and the Defense Security Equipment International Event in London.
These events were backloaded into the quarter with 60% of our quarterly revenue coming in September alone.
As we started the quarter, the net square footage being sold to exhibitors, which generally correlates to our revenue, was tracking lower than pre-pandemic levels by about 30%.
For the events that took place, the overall average revenue decline was about 50% compared to pre pandemic occurrences.
In the third quarter, we saw key clients spending about 138% of pre-pandemic budgets, and I believe this level of corporate spending is a strong bellwether for the recovery of log events.
Our U.S. team completed an impressive program for Caterpillar at MINExpo that required moving receiver the size of a two story house and over 3,000 hours to install and dismantle.
Money20/20, a financial technology show that occurs each year in Amsterdam and Las Vegas, is a terrific example of the power of one GES team.
Our brand experience team won new business from Sanofi, one of the top 10 largest pharmaceutical companies in the world as well as renewed business with Northwestern Mutual and National Society of Cutaneous Medicine.
During the third quarter, we experienced an acceleration of business activity at both Pursuit and GES with revenue increasing to nearly four times the level generated in the second quarter and reaching 66% of the amount we realized in the pre-pandemic 2019 third quarter.
At GES, we realized revenue of $116 million, which improved nearly 370% from the second quarter and reached 53% of the amount generated in the pre-pandemic 2019 third quarter due to increased face-to-face live event activity and the return of large-scale events that were canceled or postponed for most of 2020 and into the first half of 2021.
GES adjusted segment EBITDA was negative $4.2 million, which improved by approximately $7.4 million as compared to the prior year, driven by the increase in revenue and the cost structure improvements that we have implemented.
As a reminder, the 2020 third quarter adjusted segment EBITDA included a gain of about $13.5 million from the sale of our San Diego facility.
When adjusted to exclude this gain from the prior year quarter, our year-over-year improvement in EBITDA at GES was $21 million.
That's a flow-through of just over 20% on GES' incremental revenue.
At Pursuit, we experienced a year-over-year revenue increase of approximately $68.7 million and reached about 87% of the revenue amount generated in the pre-pandemic 2019 third quarter.
Pursuit's third quarter revenue was $117.6 million, and adjusted segment EBITDA was positive $59.6 million.
As David mentioned earlier, Pursuit's adjusted segment EBITDA improved by $39.9 million year-over-year.
Additionally, the three new high-margin attractions that we opened this year, the Sky Lagoon, Golden Skybridge and FlyOver Las Vegas, collectively contributed an incremental $7.4 million of revenue during the quarter.
Our net income attributable to Viad was $15.1 million for the quarter, and our income before other items was $18.4 million, which excludes restructuring charges, attraction start-up costs, acquisition, integration and transaction-related costs and other nonrecurring expenses as applicable.
Our cash flow from operations was an inflow of approximately $37 million for the quarter.
Our capital expenditures totaled about $20 million and were more than offset by our positive operating cash flow.
Our investments were mainly at Pursuit and included growth capex of approximately $8 million for the FlyOver Las Vegas attraction, which opened as planned on September one.
During the quarter, we paid cash dividends of approximately $2 million on our convertible preferred equity, which were previously paid in kind.
We ended the third quarter with approximately $111 million in cash and cash equivalents, and we had approximately $78 million of capacity available on our revolving credit facility.
On September 30, 2021, our debt totaled approximately $470 million, and this included our $400 million term loan B, our financing lease obligations of approximately $64 million, and approximately $6 million in debt at FlyOver Iceland.
We have a solid platform that can scale with us as we execute against our exciting Refresh, Build, Buy growth strategy at Pursuit, including the new 88-room hotel in Jasper and FlyOver Canada, Toronto.
We currently expect a free cash outflow during the fourth quarter in the range of $35 million to $40 million, and this assumes an operating cash outflow somewhere in the range of $20 million and capital expenditures of approximately $15 million, and this includes growth capex for our new 88-room hotel in Jasper.
We will also make our first quarterly term loan B principal payment of $1 million and expect to pay approximately $2 million in cash dividends on our convertible preferred equity.
