First, our adjusted EBITDA for the quarter was up $153 million or 12%, but even after excluding the impact of winter storm, Uri, our adjusted EBITDA was up 6%.
Adjusted earnings per share for the quarter increased 35%, simply reflecting the after-tax impact of the higher EBITDA, AFFO grew for the quarter similarly to our growth in EBITDA, and again AFFOs essentially cash from operations including JV cash flows, but excluding working capital fluctuations.
If you put AFFO up against our capital investments for the quarter of $277 million, of which we consider roughly $47 million of that to be maintenance capital, and you put it up against our dividends of $498 million you can see that we generated over $250 million in excess cash for the quarter.
Also, you see our dividend coverage on this page based on AFFO divided by dividends sets at a very strong 2.07 times.
This strong cash generation and strong EBITDA for the quarter along with continued capital discipline has helped move us toward our leverage metric goal of 4.20 times.
You will see later in our guidance update in this deck we've moved our guidance now for the year from around 4.25 times at the end of the year, now to around 12.20 times at the end of the year.
That impact produced a $55 million net benefit and included the positive impact on our marketing operations offset somewhat by reduced revenues at our Piceance processing facility, whose rates are impacted by net liquid margins.
We also had slightly lower volumes in the Mid-Continent Haynesville and collectively we estimate winter storm Uri impacted our West volumes by about 70 Mcf a day during the quarter.
In addition, we also realized a $22 million Uri uplift in profits from the Wamsutter upstream assets that we acquired from BP in February, and that is on top of the $8 million from normal operations from these upstream assets.
So the total winter storm impact was about -- was a $77 million benefit.
Again, with that benefit EBITDA was up 12% and even without the impact of winter storm Uri, EBITDA was up 6%.
So digging into our core operations, our Transmission and Gulf of Mexico assets produced results that were about $9 million less than the same period last year.
However, new transmission pipeline projects added $29 million in incremental revenues for the quarter, including the Hillabee Phase 2 project that came into service in the second quarter of last year, the Southeastern Trail project that went into service during the fourth quarter of last year, and a portion of the Leidy South project that went into service in the fourth quarter of last year.
You can see that evidenced in the growth in our firm reserve capacity, which is up 5% from the first quarter of 2020.
These revenue increases were almost entirely offset by lower Gulf of Mexico revenues due to some production and downtime issues, lower revenues from lower rates and just a few Transco markets that went into effect upon closing the rate case last year, and one less billing day this year than last year given last year was a leap year which, believe it or not, has a $6 million impact on our transmission revenues.
Now moving to the Northeast, that G&P segment continues to come on strong contributing $32 million of additional EBITDA this quarter.
Collectively, total Northeast gathering volumes grew 920 Mcf a day or about 11% this quarter versus the first quarter of last year, while processing volumes grew 15%.
As a result, our EBITDA from equity-method investments improved by a little over $33 million, which also includes the benefit of additional profits from Blue Racer due to our increased ownership, which we acquired in mid-November last year.
Now moving to the West G&P segment, it was up $44 million compared to the prior year.
And remember again, that this excludes the $55 million net benefit from winter storm Uri.
So, of this $44 million improvement commodity margins from our marketing activities contributed a big part of that improvement and they were up $52 million versus the first quarter of 2020.
And again, this excludes the $74 million benefit from winter storm Uri related just only commodities.
Offsetting the higher commodity margins were lower profits from our JVs, we did see a $5 million JV benefit from the winter storm Uri on our Brazos JV.
So if you exclude that our JVs were down about $8 million that can be mostly attributable attributed to OPPL where one Oak has pulled much of their volume and moved into their solely on system.
Revenues were down $14 million when you exclude a negative $23 million impact tied to winter storm Uri on West revenues, and again mostly that was in the PR related to net liquid margins.
Volumes in Northwest were down 250 Mcf a day or if you exclude winter storm Uri about -- they were down about a 180 Mcf a day, with most of that reduction in the Haynesville and the Eagle Ford, which of course are running and Eagle Ford, we are protected by MVCs so that doesn't have revenue impact.
And here moving on to the key investor focus areas on Slide 3.
We're increasing the midpoint of our '21 EBITDA guidance range to $5.3 billion, which is up a $100 million.
Achieving this new midpoint we've produced a three year CAGAR of about 4.5%, even while we have continued to improve our balance sheet and produced free cash flow after capex and dividends.
Regarding the balance sheet, our deleveraging goal is now on an accelerated path as we've hit the targeted 4.2 this quarter, which obviously is earlier than we had forecasted earlier, and we're currently on positive watch at Moody's and hope to see a credit upgrade soon.
So next on the list here is a few thoughts about the Sequent acquisition, as we announced last night, we recently reached an agreement to purchase Sequent Energy Management and Sequent Energy Canada from Southern Company Gas for a purchase price of $50 million plus working capital at close, and for several years we have been evaluating the best way to enhance our marketing capabilities at Williams in way that it could be well integrated, culturally aligned, and focused on driving fee-based revenues across our networks for several years.
The addition of Sequent including its talented workforce and industry-leading platform complements the current geographic footprint of our core pipeline transportation and storage business for perspective, we handle 30% of the nation's natural gas, which is approximately 30 Bcf per day.
This acquisition increases our natural gas transport and storage optimization capabilities, up to 8 Bcf per day from 1 Bcf per day that we were doing previously in -- here within Williams.
So now moving on to project's execution here on Slide 3, still, we continued our pace of strong project execution in the first quarter placing on Southeastern Trail project in the full service in early January and making great progress now on the Transco Leidy South project to bring additional gas from Appalachian area and particularly Northeast PA to growing demand centers along the Atlantic Seaboard by next winter.
And by setting a near-term goal of a 56% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2030, as a part of our climate commitment, we are well in line with the Biden administration's recently announced Nationally Determined Contribution target of a 50% to 52% reduction by 2030.
On the solar front, we've currently identified three additional projects and now have a total of 16 solar project opportunities that should start operating beginning in 2023.
As evidence on a year-over-year basis, the lower-48 natural gas production here, of course, in United States is declined by 5% here in the first quarter at the same time, Williams' natural gas gathering volumes were up by 5%, indicating that our strategy of focusing on key low-cost natural gas basins is working.
