As evidence, Williams gas gathering volumes grew 6% in the first half of 2021, while the U.S.s natural gas production volumes actually declined by 0.4%, continuing to prove that our assets are in the low-cost basins.
First, our adjusted EBITDA for the quarter was up $77 million or 6%, and we have seen a 9% increase in EBITDA year-to-date.
Adjusted earnings per share for the quarter increased $0.02 a share or 8% and AFFO grew for the quarter similar to our growth in EBITDA.
If you put our year-to-date AFFO of $1.948 billion up against our capital investments year-to-date of $737 million and our dividends of $996 million, we have generated about $250 million of excess cash year-to-date.
Included, as a side note, included in the capital investments is about $160 million of maintenance capital.
Also, you can see our dividend coverage based on AFFO divided by dividends is a healthy 1.96 times year-to-date.
This strong cash generation and strong EBITDA for the quarter, along with continued capital discipline, has led to our exceeding our leverage metric goal where were currently set at 4.13 times debt-to-EBITDA.
You will see later in our guidance update in this deck that weve moved our guidance for the year from being around 4.2 times by the end of the year to now less than 4.2 times debt-to-EBITDA for the year.
Our upstream operations added $19 million of incremental EBITDA this quarter.
Production from the combined Wamsutter assets totaled 6.9 Bcf for the quarter.
They produced results that were $31 million more than the same period last year.
New transmission pipeline projects added $25 million in incremental revenues versus the second quarter last year, including the Southeastern Trails project that went into service during the fourth quarter of last year, as well as a portion of the Leidy South project that also went into service in the fourth quarter of last year.
And you can see this evidenced in the growth in our firm reserve capacity, which is up 5% from the second quarter of 2020.
In addition, commodity margins from processing volumes for processing the Gulf of Mexico gas was about $5 million due to higher NGL prices and higher volumes.
The Northeast G&P segment continues to come on strong, contributing $46 million of additional EBITDA this quarter.
Collectively, total Northeast gathering volumes grew 750 Mcf a day or 9% this quarter versus the second quarter of last year, while processing volumes grew 33% and set a new record.
As a result of this volume growth, though, our EBITDA from our equity method investments improved by a little over $36 million, which also includes the benefit of additional profits that we do receive from Blue Racer Midstream due to the additional ownership we acquired in mid-November last year.
It was down $21 million compared to the prior year.
The impact of the gathering rate reduction was about a negative $15 million for the quarter.
In addition, in the quarter, we also saw $9 million less EBITDA due to a deficiency fee that One Oak paid us last year related to OPPL, which allowed them to pull volume that they had otherwise submitted to OPPL last year.
And finally, we did see a $9 million decline in deferred revenue from our Barnett Shale gathering assets, which is a noncash step-down in revenues.
So other than those three negatives, namely the lack of efficiency revenue on OPPL, the Haynesville rate decline and the deferred revenue step-down in the Barnett, our West assets were otherwise up $12 million versus the second quarter of last year.
And while our overall gather volumes in the West were down about 3.5% versus the second quarter of last year, this was more than offset by better gathering rates, where in the Piceance and the Barnett, our contracted gathering rates are influenced by commodity prices.
Year-to-date, our results show growth of $230 million of EBITDA or roughly a 9% in EBITDA, driven, of course, by the impact of Winter Storm Uri in the first quarter and by many of the same positive factors that I just mentioned affecting second quarter growth.
Combined between our marketing activities and our upstream operations in the Wamsutter, winter storm Uri had a combined positive impact of $77 million.
In addition, our upstream operations otherwise have added an additional $27 million year-to-date.
Our Transmission & Gulf of Mexico assets are up $22 million year-to-date or about 2% better, with this increase being driven largely by additional transmission revenues from new projects that have been put into service and incremental revenues from Gulf of Mexico assets, largely due to lower downtime this year versus last year.
Our North G&P assets are up $78 million, almost entirely driven by profits from our JV investments, namely from the Bradford Supply Hub gathering system and our Marcellus South gathering systems.
In total, gathering volumes for the Northeast are up 10% versus 2020, while processing volumes year-to-date are up 24%.
And then finally, the West, West E&P is up $23 million versus the year-to-date last year, and this is on top of the $55 million that we earned from winter storm Uri.
The $23 million increase is driven by higher commodity margins and slightly lower operating costs, offset by lower Barnett deferred revenues, lower Haynesville gathering rates, which were exchanged for upstream acreage, and lower OPPL deficiency revenues that I just mentioned in my 2Q remarks.
Otherwise, we did see a 5% gathering volume decline year-to-date, but that again was more than offset by MVCs and higher gathering rates, as again, I mentioned in my second quarter remarks.
The resilience of our business has supported our financial results and helped us recently overachieve against our previous leverage metric goal of 4.2 times.
As we announced last month, we were able to finalize an upstream joint venture with Crowheart in the Wamsutter basin, consolidating our legacy BP Southland and Crowheart upstream assets into one contiguous footprint of more than 1.2 million acres.
We continue to advance our solar projects that were announced last year, and Im pleased to share that we have six projects now awaiting approval from the grid operator with another 10 ready for the same regulatory approval by the end of 2021.
In total, these 16 projects amount to about $250 million in capex.
It should start to cash flows beginning in 2023, and we have another approximately $150 million of these similar projects that are under development.
And in fact, in a partnership with the University of Wyoming, we recently awarded a $1 million -- we were recently awarded a $1 million grant from the State of Wyoming to fund a feasibility study that would evaluate the creation of a green hydrogen hub near our operations in Wyoming.
In the Wamsutter, we now have 1.2 million acres dedicated to our midstream assets through the Crowheart JV.
But in addition to that, we have about 200,000 acres where we own or control the surface rights, which we intend to leverage for clean energy development.
