spain costs increased by $ 53 million , while we also experienced higher costs in norway and brazil.
before we get underway , however , in particularly at a time where we are experiencing a rapidly changing market dynamic , i would like to reinforce once again that our values , which we established when we launched as an independent company in 2016 continue to guide us.
it 's not just about the results , but also how we achieve them.
our values continue to be foundational for our company and our embedded in all of our decisions.
we had another strong quarter , bolstered by aluminum prices that are higher than we 've seen in more than a decade.
now , as alcoa corporation approaches its five - year anniversary , we 've been reflecting on the achievements alcoans across the globe that helped us to accomplish.
it is clear that our strategic priorities are creating value.
today , both our balance sheet and operating portfolio are in a much stronger position , with no substantial debt maturities until 2027.
with that , here 's roy.
these decisions concerning capital returns align with our existing capital allocation framework and reflect two important points.
second , we believe the markets we participate in will be stronger , that this cycle will last longer and then alcoa is well positioned to deliver in a low - carbon esg focused world.
any reference in our discussion today to ebitda means adjusted ebitda.
i 'm joined today by roy harvey , alcoa corporation 's president and chief executive officer ; and william oplinger , executive vice president and chief financial officer.
for the fourth quarter , overall with alumar refinery production returning close to normal operating levels and if current aluminum and alumina index pricing levels persist , we expect another record - setting quarter.
payment of prior year taxes has been adjusted $ 5 million to $ 30 million and environmental and aro spending is expected to be $ 20 million better , down to $ 120 million for the year.
but our work is never complete.
