as we discussed last quarter , our gennext stores continue to perform at a high level.
through the tremendous efforts of our team , we continue to transform aaron 's go - to - market strategy by delivering customer friendly digital solutions , easy lease approvals and an enhanced shopping experience.
since 1955 , aaron's has been committed to serving a customer base that has too often been overlooked or excluded from preferred retail experiences.
today , we are leveraging our long and deep understanding of this customer segment to say yes when others say no ; to provide our customers with access to great products on flexible and affordable terms and to deliver a seamless customer experience not only across our distributed store network but also digitally through our award winning e-commerce platform.
continued investments in our best - in - class e-commerce channel , predictive lease decisioning engine and our high performing gennext stores are driving greater productivity and growth in our business.
i 'm pleased to announce that our third quarter 2021 results have again exceeded our expectations through continued growth in the size of our lease portfolio same - store revenues and e-commerce revenues.
we attribute this growth primarily to strong demand for our products , higher average ticket , the favorable impact of centralized lease decisioning and the residual impact of government stimulus on the portfolio.
as a result , we returned another $ 37.5 million to shareholders in the quarter in the form of share repurchases.
in addition , our lease decisioning algorithms allow us to be flexible in responding to changes in the macroeconomic environment and to optimize outcomes that drive profitability.
this brings us to a total of nearly $ 100 million of capital returned to shareholders thus far this year.
the improvement was primarily driven by an 8.7 % larger lease portfolio size entering the third quarter partially offset by a lower level of customer payment activity compared to the prior year.
for those of you that have not , it is available on the investor relations section of our website at investor.
this compares to approximately 60 % at the beginning of 2021.
for any period , the customer lease renewal rate is calculated by dividing the amount of customer payments recorded on an accrual basis as of the end of such period by the amount of total customer lease payments due for renewal during that period.
we also expect lease merchandise write - offs in 2022 to settle below pre-pandemic levels but above the level we expect for full year 2021.
because of this , we 're generating a higher customer conversion rate , lowering our effective acquisition costs and delivering higher customer satisfaction.
