we have been through challenging times before and each time we have emerged stronger , given our long - term focus on high quality , diversified asset base.
as most of you know , all of our properties in hawaii are owned fee simple and are very valuable.
we have a strong view that post - pandemic , waikiki will return to normal , pent up tourism returning and every night being like a friday night.
while this pandemic still remains a threat that we believe we are well prepared to endure a prolonged pandemic with our irreplaceable portfolio , our best - in - class operating platform , our top - notch management team , our disciplined financial strength and a very strong balance sheet.
however , at the present time , this pandemic continues to create challenges within our portfolio , particularly for our three theaters , gym's and our waikiki beach walk properties.
in such regard , i am extremely proud to announce that our inaugural public offering , which we closed on january 26 , 2021 , the offering consists of $ 500 million of 3.38 % senior unsecured notes due 2031.
and by the way , it was oversubscribed 4 times.
the total collections to - date of approximately 92 % in q4 versus 90 % in q3 and 87 % in q2.
yet , our collections of monthly recurring billings due continued to improve in q4 over q3 and q3 over q2.
of course , we too have felt the bumps along the road like everyone else in our sectors.
bob will provide more financial details on the bond offering.
first and foremost , i would like to wish all our stakeholders and their loved ones continued health and safety during these truly unprecedented times.
as you can see , we 're mutually cooperative.
both are now available on the investors section of our website , americanassetstrust.com.
number two , we have embedded contractual growth and cash flow in our office portfolio , with approximately $ 24 million of in - place growth in just the office cash noi in ' 21 and ' 22.
during this pandemic , our ebitda has been challenged , like others with exposure to retail and our hotel , resulting in lower ebitda.
