the original design of the community and ground lease contemplated the potential leasing of units beyond the dcp program with configurable furniture , attractive individual lease liability options , and an unmatched amenity package in the market.
while our business has not fully normalized at this time , we believe we are on the road to recovery as exemplified in many areas.
our lease - up occupancy exceeded 90 % , a level many believe to be a best - case scenario in the early days of this pandemic.
our rent collection rate improved to 97 % in september , the first full month of the new academic year in most of our markets , from approximately 94 % in q2.
we 're also receiving significantly fewer resident hardship rent abatement request.
let me start by saying that we are pleased with the start of the 2020 - 2021 academic year.
finally , as part of our ongoing commitment to the hi , how are you project , whose mission is to remove the stigma associated with mental illness and to encourage discussion regarding mental health and well - being.
even amid this black swan event , the resounding value of a college degree and abundant demand for higher education at power five and carnegie r1 research institutions continues underpinning the stability and consistent growth opportunity in our sector.
also , as william will discuss , in acc 's tier one university markets , there appears to be enrollment stability amid the pandemic.
we have also definitively witnessed the strong consumer sentiment regarding students ' desires to be in the college environment with their peers regardless of university 's curriculum delivery methodology , whether it being online , in - person , or a hybrid combination.
and our university partners have planned and implemented prudent strategies.
it appears to have provided stability and ongoing on - campus occupancies.
bill bayless , chief executive officer ; jim hopke , president ; jennifer beese , chief operating officer ; william talbot , chief investment officer ; daniel perry , chief financial officer ; kim voss , chief accounting officer ; and jamie wilhelm , our evp of public - private partnerships.
the survey received responses from over 12,000 of our residents.
this is one of the largest surveys of its kind , specifically examining college student 's perspectives about covid and how it has impacted their mental health.
it is also worth noting that both the cdc and dr. fauci have urged universities to not send students back home to their primary residents if at all possible , to eliminate the risk of scattering students throughout the country and putting them in contact with parents and family that may be in a higher risk category.
