gerber will be subject to a new 15 - year lease upon completion and we anticipate rent will commence in the second quarter of 2022.
notably , we completed our inaugural preferred equity offering during the 3rd quarter , raising $ 175 million at a 4.25 % coupon.
this represents the lowest non-psa reit preferred equity coupon in history and provides a new source of perpetual capital for our rapidly growing company.
while our investment activities further strengthen our best - in - class retail portfolio we have also fortified our robust balance sheet with $ 1.5 billion of capital markets transactions year - to - date positioning our company for dynamic growth in the quarters ahead.
the acquired properties at a weighted average cap rate of 6.2 % and a weighted average lease term of 10.7 years.
while replicating these investment volume is the testament to the efforts of our talented team , i am most pleased with the exceptional quality of the investments that we 've made in a challenging environment.
shortly after executing a letter of intent to purchase this portfolio , bp announced they 're taking full ownership of thorntons convenience store chain after 2.5 years as part of a joint venture established in 2019.
as mentioned , through the first 9 months of the year , we 've invested a record $ 1.1 billion in 226 retail net lease properties spanning 40 states across the country and 26 retail sectors.
this transaction makes bp , which is an a minus rated company by s&p , one of the leading convenience store operators in the midwest with more than 200 stores across 6 states.
our acquisition team also continues to uncover compelling ground lease opportunities.
during this past quarter , we executed on several unique transactions , including our 3rd amazon fresh store in illinois.
in addition , we discuss non-gaap financial measures including core funds from operations or core ffo , adjusted funds from operations or affo and net debt to recurring ebitda.
other notable ground lease acquisitions during the quarter , including are walmart and sam's club in lansing , michigan , two lowe 's stores located in wallingford , connecticut and abington , massachusetts , and a cvs in springfield , massachusetts.
many of you are familiar with mike as he most recently served as chairman of the us real estate , gaming and lodging investment banking practice at jefferies.
we have made a concerted effort to approach to tailor our pharmacy exposure given the high per square foot rental rates of many vintage pharmacy leases and then virgin approaches of cvs and walgreens to a quickly changing landscape.
this portfolio continues to represent an extremely attractive risk - adjusted investment for our shareholders.
