for the second quarter , we expect results to be slightly stronger than the second quarter of 2020 , but significantly lower than the record first quarter of 2021 with stronger crushing and rpo expectations compared to the second quarter of 2020 , offsetting seasonably lower ag service results.
and our trailing fourth quarter adjusted ebitda was about $ 4.2 billion , 19 % higher than the prior year period.
i 'm proud of our team , and they continue to deliver sustained strong growth , powered by their continued advancement of the strategic transformation of our business , outstanding execution and excellent risk management and commitment to serving the evolving needs of our customers in new and innovative ways.
i 'd like to take a moment now to highlight some of the trends , developments and accomplishments from the first quarter.
first , we are encouraged by many of the demand indicators we are seeing.
from a geographic perspective , china was one of the first countries to emerge from covid - related restrictions , and we are continuing to see significant export demand driven by its economic recovery.
in summary , recovery from covid and demand improvements are occurring at varying paces depending on geography and products.
in the u.s. meat production is strong as exports and retail sales remain robust and restaurant dining expands.
vaccine rollout has been slower in emea but is accelerating now.
from a product perspective , expectation of a progressive recovery in global foodservice will support demand for sweeteners , flower and other ingredients in 2021.
and so we 're optimistic that demand will recover there as the year progresses.
of course , some countries like brazil and india are still in the midst of the pandemic and demand there may be slower to come back.
we reported first quarter adjusted earnings per share of $ 1.39 , more than double the year ago period.
the carbohydrate solutions team again delivered significant year - over - year profit growth.
our chief financial officer , ray young , will review the drivers of our performance as well as corporate results and financial highlights.
we committed that we will not restart those facilities until we saw economic and market factors that would point to a sustainable recovery.
