additionally , the new redundant reserve financing will save approximately $ 9 million pre-tax per quarter in financing costs once the transaction is closed relative to the prior facility.
we outlined the building blocks in order to execute the strategy , improve returns , and migrate to the capital - efficient business model we envisioned.
we introduced the virtuous flywheel of the due [ phonetic ] ael business model going forward.
before we speak about third - quarter results , i want to share with you about the progress made in each element of our ael 2.0 strategy that was first unveiled around this time , last year.
we delivered a complete refresh of our general account product suite , regained relevance and growth in our imo distribution channel , and built additional distribution with eagle life while adding talent to improve productivity and product economics.
it is now my pleasure to introduce anant bhalla.
our fundraising abilities through our liability origination platforms allow us to be an investment manager with expertise in both liability - driven asset allocation and to manage an open - architecture investment platform that can source a wide variety of differentiated investments.
on the brookfield reinsurance transaction , we executed both in - force and new business flow reinsurance , effective july 1.
the latter will be our focus with our ael bermuda reinsurance entity that we expect to go live around the end of this year with plans progressing well for it.
we believe this is a good deal for both parties.
we now have six sleeves [ phonetics ] to seven sleeves private asset sectors in which we have conviction , specifically commercial real estate , residential real estate , including mortgages , and single - family rental homes as a landlord.
an audio replay will be made available on our website shortly after today 's call.
finally , we 've got the capital structuring and reinsurance capabilities to then attract third - party risk - bearing capital to this business , either for accessing ael 's at - scale liability origination or for access to both our differentiated asset allocations and our attractive cost of funding liabilities through reinsurance.
our actual results could significantly differ due to many risks , including the risk factors in our sec filings.
infrastructure debt and infrastructure equity , middle - market loans to private companies , and lending to recurring revenue , technology or software with an acronym called starr , with two rs , sector companies , all of which would allow ael to deploy an additional couple of billion dollars each year in private assets , demonstrably moving us toward a goal of 30 % to 40 % in private assets.
this strategy will focus on companies that offer mission - critical , high return on investment , software or technology solutions , resulting in recession - resistant revenue streams and lower default rates.
