over a 36 hour period , our wass team transported approximately 2,000 u.s. embassy personnel to kabul international airport to support their evacuation from the country.
we are particularly pleased that our sequential growth from q4 , q1 was 4 % , notwithstanding the fact that our first quarter typically declines from our fourth quarter as a result of seasonality in our business.
sequential growth in our commercial activities was 17 %.
this improvement was driven by our parts businesses , which is an encouraging indicator of returning demand.
the strong performance in the quarter was also due to the robust demand for our airframe mro services.
compared to the prior year period , sales were up 14 % from $ 401 million to 405 -- $ 455 million and adjusted diluted earnings per share from continuing operations were up 206 % from $ 0.17 per share to $ 0.52 per share.
notably , the significant majority of our mro volume has been on standard maintenance work as opposed to catch - up work.
first , we announced an exclusive agreement with arkwin , a transdigm company to distribute engine actuation and other commercial aviation product.
our operating margin was 5.5 % for the quarter on an adjusted basis up from 2.5 % last year and 5.2 % in the fourth quarter.
excluding the impact of that ar program , our cash flow from operating activities from continuing operation was $ 26 million.
this award reflects the power of our independent distribution offering to component oems as well as the strength of our balance sheet.
for context , our margin this quarter was actually higher than 2 years ago prior to the pandemic even though our revenue was down $ 86 million or 16 %.
our positive momentum continued with another quarter of solid results , despite the continuing impact of the covid - 19 pandemic.
we also continue to reduce the usage of our accounts receivable financing program.
this performance demonstrates the operating leverage that we have created over the last 18 months by optimizing our mro operations , exiting underperforming activities and reducing indirect and overhead costs.
like our prior c40 aircraft delivery contract with the u.s. marine corps , this contract demonstrates the significant cost savings available to government customers by procuring in the aftermarket.
