also , crop prices have been steadily rising since august of 2020 , giving professional farmers the confidence to invest in maintenance or replacement of their equipment.
the key takeaways from our second quarter 2021 results are : second quarter sales and earnings are up significantly over the covid impacted prior year second quarter.
total company net sales of $ 348 million were up 29 %.
so dan , go ahead , please.
net income of $ 26 million or $ 2.19 per diluted share was up 100 %.
and i will then provide more comments on the results.
we saw strong customer demand and backlog growth in all of this division 's product lines.
during the quarter , our top line benefited from a continued rise in order rates and backlog as well as the effect of recent pricing actions , but inbound supply chain and labor capacity issues are still constraining our growth across all lines of business.
also , our trailing 12 - month adjusted ebitda was $ 155.3 million , up 7 % from full year 2020.
and our backlog increased 10 % during the current second quarter to $ 503.6 million , which was up 132 % over the prior year quarter.
market demand , covid - 19 impacts , including operational logistics and supply chain disruptions , competition , weather , seasonality , currency - related issues , geopolitical issues and other risk factors listed from time - to - time in the company 's sec reports.
also , stimulus actions taken by national governments in north america and europe helped agencies at the state and local level offset lower revenue from income taxes and fees as employment fell as a result of pandemic.
municipalities in the united states benefited from the very strong real estate market that has increased property taxes that are a major source of their revenue.
the impact of the pandemic on governmental budget has not been as severe as previously expected , and activity in this market continued to improve sequentially during the period.
it 's an honor to succeed ron robinson , who 's had an exemplary 22 - year period as our ceo.
this is certainly an interesting time to step in as ceo with the many positive and challenging trends that are influencing business at the moment.
