we also expect to increase the number of agents actively engaged in selling national general products.
so allstate 's strategy has two components : increase personal profit liability market share ; and expand protection solutions , which are shown in the two ovals on the left.
this strategy will drive market valuation by executing , innovating and focusing on long - term value creation.
today , we 're going to link operating results and strategy in order to show how we expect to continue to generate shareholder value.
so in the first half of the year , we executed well for customers , we executed well financially and for shareholders , as you can see on the right - hand panel.
the transformative growth plan to create a digital insurance company is making good progress.
let 's start on slide two.
allstate protection plans continue to grow rapidly by broadening the product offering to include appliance and furniture and expanding availability through home depot stores.
allstate is among the leaders in telematics capabilities with drivewise in the industry 's largest pay - per- mile product milewise , which offers customers unique value.
strong execution generated excellent financial results , with revenues increasing 23.8 % compared to the prior year , adjusted net income of $ 3 billion and a return on equity of 23.8 % for the last 12 months.
let 's continue on slide three.
national general , which includes encompass , contributed growth of four million policies , and allstate brand property - liability policies increased in the quarter driven by growth in homeowners and other personal lines.
our management team is here to provide perspective on these results.
so mario will now discuss the second quarter results in more detail.
yesterday , on the close of the market , we issued our news release and investor supplement and posted related materials on our website at allstateinvestors.com.
arity , our telematics service platform company , recently launched arity iq , which , when combined with leadcloud and transparent.
