in addition to these acquisitions , ametek also acquired two smaller and yet highly strategic businesses , and [ phonetic ] crank software and egs automation.
and as the economy continues its recovery , we are experiencing strong orders growth resulting in a record backlog.
operationally , our businesses are performing at a high level , delivering impressive margin expansion and strong cash flows.
additionally , we started the year with a notable level of acquisition activity , deploying a record $ 1.85 billion on five acquisitions thus far in 2021.
we returned to organic sales growth earlier than expected.
these acquisitions combined with our strong first quarter results and solid orders momentum led us to substantially increase our full year sales and earnings guidance.
ametek 's success in navigating this difficult environment is a testament to the dedicated and highly talented employees across the company.
operating income in the quarter was $ 293 million , a 6 % increase over the first quarter of 2020.
while we are encouraged with the acceleration of the vaccine rollout , we remain focused on the health and well - being of our employees and we 'll remain vigilant in ensuring proper safety protocols are being followed.
operating margins expanded an impressive 110 basis points to 24.1 %.
i 'll now turn the meeting over to dave.
organic sales were up 1 % with the divestiture of reading alloys being offset by a two point foreign currency tailwind.
this new range is a $ 0.28 midpoint increase from our previous adjusted earnings guidance of $ 4.18 to $ 4.30 per diluted share.
a detailed discussion of the risks and uncertainties that may affect our future results is contained in ametek 's filings with the sec.
diluted earnings per share are now expected to be in the range of $ 4.48 to $ 4.56 , which is an increase of 13 % to 15 % over last year 's comparable basis.
nsi - mi has annual sales of approximately $ 90 million , and we deployed $ 230 million on the acquisition.
