as we stated before , the approach to risk strategy has shifted from being generally defensive and risk averse to more opportunistic , taking a holistic , integrated view as they seek solutions to address these challenges.
additionally , aon 's colleague engagement is at the highest levels we 've seen over the past decade , consistent with top quartile employers.
we 're also proud to report that our client feedback continues to be outstanding as net promoter scores are at a five - year high.
this client feedback and colleague engagement are directly reflected in our firm 's sustained momentum and financial performance.
this performance is an extraordinary accomplishment and a direct result of their efforts , working together as one firm to bring the best of aon to clients.
in deep appreciation for all that our colleagues do for our clients and our firm , we were excited to establish in q3 the aon united growth ownership plan.
and as a result of our colleagues ' hard work , dedication and perseverance , we 've delivered outstanding results in q3 and year - to - date.
we also saw double - digit growth for the second consecutive quarter in the more discretionary portions of our business , such as transaction liability , human capital and project - related work within commercial risk solutions and health solutions.
our aon united strategy is delivering significant momentum in every solution line , with net new business generation and ongoing strong retention.
overall , as we reflect on q3 and the first nine months of 2021 , our momentum , defined by client delivery , colleague engagement and financial results , is exceptional , even more promising as what we see in the opportunity ahead.
we continue to expect mid-single - digit or greater organic revenue growth and margin expansion in the full year 2021 , 2022 and over the long term as we continue to win share in our core business and execute to further expand our total addressable market.
our conversations with clients reinforce substantial and growing unmet demand to support them in making better decisions to protect and grow their businesses in an increasingly volatile world.
this opportunity to create new markets to serve our clients is the catalyst for our innovation agenda and a source of greater momentum in our business.
i 'm joined by christa davies , our chief financial officer ; and eric andersen , our president.
there 's great respect to the need to defend their businesses , but that 's accompanied by a desire to find solutions that help them win , that the ip financing example highlights.
today , we 'd like to highlight how the core tenets of our blueprint drive momentum and deliver greater future opportunity.
