both women are senior executives and we believe ari will benefit greatly from their insight and expertise.
at presence -- at present , the pace of activity continues to accelerate , and regardless of the asset class , the combination of a low - interest rate environment and significant fund flows is supporting robust transaction volume and a well - funded high highly liquid financing market.
the commercial real estate lending market has surpassed 2019 levels and is on track for a record year in terms of lending volumes across cmbs , banks , insurance companies , and non -bank lenders such as ari.
in contrast to operating performance , real estate investment and financing activity recovered sooner and more quickly , consistent with the broad and rapid recovery across the capital markets.
the pipeline continues to be a mix of both us and european transactions for well - positioned high - quality properties with institutional sponsorship in gateway markets.
we expect ari loan origination totals for 2021 will approach pre-pandemic levels as we have already committed to an additional $ 340 million of transactions in the fourth quarter and we are working through a number of other transactions that should close by year - end.
our repayments reflect encouraging signs from the general economy as transitional assets are achieving their business plans including construction projects achieving certificates of occupancy and for - sale residential units being sold.
it is worth highlighting that ari 's loan originations year - to - date continue to favor europe , which is reflective of a combination of the strong reputation and market position our team has developed there , slightly less competition , and our team 's ability to underwrite and structure large transactions.
there have been clear property type and geographic winners , as well as those asset types and regions that remain challenged.
to reiterate what i have said previously , the types of transactions , quality of equity sponsorship , and deal structures for ari 's european loans are very similar to the transactions we complete in the united states.
in general , the credit quality across our portfolio remains stable and we continue to make progress with our focus loans.
before i finish my remarks , i want to take a minute to highlight some recent corporate governance highlights with respect to our board of directors.
the portfolio had a weighted average unlevered yield of 5.2 % and the remaining fully extended term of just under three years.
jai has made valuable contributions to ari during his tenure , and we will be , sorry to see him go.
the loan portfolio at quarter - end was $ 7.3 billion , a slight decline from the end of previous quarter due to increased loan repayments.
one of his greatest contributions was building a strong team below him and he will leave us in good hands.
