before beginning , let 's take a moment for our usual cautionary reminder.
the bright spot for us was herbicides for corn , soybeans , fruits and vegetables , which recorded an increase of 86 % in net sales and 60 % increase in gross profit.
we enjoyed sales increases among our corn soil insecticides , however , they were offset by decreased sales in bidrin , our cotton insecticide , as our customers work through inventories carried over from last year when there was low pest pressure.
further , our soil fumigants sales declined by about 10 % , due largely to water allocation issues in california.
this is a good start to the year and stands in stark contrast to q1 of 2020 when the global pandemic started.
our non-crop business came on strong led by dibrom , our mosquito adulticide , pest strips and increased license fees and royalties from our proprietary envance solutions.
our pre-tax income increased 14 times and net income six times.
we continue to pursue expansion of the envance portfolio into additional markets.
from a balance sheet perspective , accounts receivable increased driven by strong sales growth.
we expect the factory efficiency will improve over the course of current year.
in addition , improved sales enabled us to reduce inventory levels when compared to the first quarter of 2020 despite the addition of the two new businesses.
we have managed operating expenses , which increased in absolute terms , but reduced when expressed as a percentage of sales.
also our newly acquired australian business , agnova , performed very well and is providing both market access and a level of critical mass to australia and the pacific region.
such factors can include weather conditions , changes in regulatory policy , competitive pressures and various other risks that are detailed in the company 's sec reports and filings.
as david will elaborate , we continued to exercise financial discipline over the quarter.
overall margins have remained in the normal range for the company.
