i will now provide updates on the california drought and our recent regulatory activity.
the third quarter contributed to a strong 2021 year - to - date , where we 've achieved 11.7 % earnings - per - share growth over last year or 10.7 % on an adjusted basis.
regarding the pending general rate case covering rates for the years 2022 through 2024 at our water utility subsidiary golden state water company , we 're pleased to report that we have reached a settlement in principle with the public advocates office of the california public utilities commission or cpuc for short , and nearly all of the items in the case.
i 'll touch on this a little more after eva 's update.
eva will discuss the quarter in more detail.
on the electric side of the business , we were pleased that in september the cpuc approved bear valley electric services most recent wildfire mitigation plan , while also in september , the office of energy , infrastructure safety under the california natural resources agency approved bear valley electric services latest safety certification filing.
the company remains in a strong position , we have successfully navigated the pandemic by continuing to deliver excellent service to our customers , while prioritizing the health and safety of our workforce and compliance with existing government guidelines.
our water segment 's reported earnings were $ 0.62 per share , as compared to $ 0.57 per share last year.
we continue to invest in needed infrastructure that results in high water quality , reliable delivery , systems safety and a commitment to preserving the precious resources that are in our care.
let me start with our third quarter financial results on slide eight.
as bob mentioned , excluding the gains on investments held to fund , one of our retirement plans from both periods.
this slide presents our reported result before adjustments.
cpuc has called on all california investor - owned water utilities to implement voluntary conservation measures to meet this goal.
currently , the majority of california is considered to be an extreme drought.
the increase in electric revenues was largely due to cpuc approved rate increases for 2021.
this was primarily due to a decrease in construction costs at our contracted services segment.
