joining me on the call today are corie barry , our ceo ; and matt bilunas , our cfo.
our omnichannel capabilities and our ability to inspire and support across all of technology in a way no one else can means we are uniquely positioned to seize the opportunity in this environment and in the future.
we continue to capitalize on strong customer demand as more people sustainably work , entertain , cook , and connect at home.
and domestic comparable sales growth was up 2 % on top of 23 % last year.
against a still evolving backdrop , our leaders continue to drive new ways of operating , and our employees continue to do amazing things to support our customer 's technology needs in knowledgeable , fast , and convenient ways.
product availability continued to improve throughout quarter.
we have varying degrees of inventory and supply chain challenges every holiday season , and this year will be no different.
today , we are reporting record q3 financial results of $ 11.9 billion in sales and non-gaap diluted earnings per share of $ 2.08 , which is up 1 % over last year and up 84 % compared to two years ago.
in addition , through our close partnerships with our product vendors , we have a great deal of visibility into and can influence the status of product in the supply chain process.
we have pockets of constraints in areas like appliances , gaming , and mobile phones.
we have deep , long - standing relationships with our transportation and logistics vendors , and they have been incredibly supportive as we navigate.
similar to last quarter , however , we do not believe this materially limited our overall sales growth.
and we are resourcefully adapting to the constantly evolving environment with actions like pulling up product flow , adjusting store assortment based on availability , and acquiring additional alternative transportation.
for this , we built out a physical store in one of our distribution centers with merchandising and products that is staffed with dedicated associates , including vendor - provided expert labor.
we launched phase 1 of our virtual store pilot last month.
it has no physical customers.
