beginning on the left side , we 'll start with north america.
today we reported third quarter results above the guidance we provided in september with double - digit increases in revenue , profits , and earnings per share.
importantly , despite slower - than - expected revenue recovery from the pandemic lows , third quarter revenue versus pre-covid levels did grow sequentially over the second quarter.
and despite other operational issues that impacted the quarter including labor shortages and wage inflation in the us that is not yet been offset by price increases that have been enacted , operating profit margin improved by 50 basis points to 10.8 %.
accordingly , our comments today will focus primarily on non-gaap results.
with continued revenue and margin improvement , this position is as well for 2022 and the future.
we believe the non-gaap results make it easier for investors to assess operating performance between periods.
and we 'd expect continued margin and growth and margin leverage as revenue grows above this pre-covid levels , which would support our initial 2022 targets as we 've provided.
as a reference point , at 100 % of the adjusted pre-covid revenue level , we would expect 2022 adjusted ebitda to be about $ 755 million.
operating profit of approximately $ 465 million , which reflects a margin increase of close to 100 basis points versus prior year.
we 're also affirming our preliminary 2022 adjusted ebit target range between $ 785 and $ 825 million.
it 's also important to note that rising fuel cost generally have not had a material impact on our profitability as most of our customer agreements have fuel surcharge clauses as a cost recovery mechanism.
we expect the $ 150 million asr will be -- we are announcing today will be substantially completed by early november.
in fact , our staffing level is currently the highest it 's been in five months , and our us hr teams are working diligently to resolve the ongoing labor shortages.
turning to the next slide.
on a global basis , we see encouraging trends indicating that revenue is recovering to pre-pandemic levels and above , as evidenced by the significant revenue recovery so far this year compared to pre-pandemic levels , though the rate of recovery may continue to be choppy and uneasy from country to country and region to region.
