this is a decrease from last year and is related to changes in valuation of the sartorius holdings.
so i 'd like to take a few minutes to review our current state of operations around the world.
overall , bio-rad has adapted well to the working constraints that covid has imposed upon us , and we find ourselves able to respond and react well to everyday operational changes and demands.
we continue to make solid progress on our core strategies , support of our customers and the safety of our employees.
finally , our remarks today will include references to non-gaap net income and diluted earnings per share , which are financial measures that are not defined under generally accepted accounting principles.
with improvement in our end markets after the significant downturn a year ago , we 're responding well to increased demand.
but as with other manufacturers in life sciences , we are having to work hard to procure raw materials in some challenged areas , such as plastics and electronic components , as well as dealing with increased pressure on raw material costs.
our actual results may differ materially from these plans and expectations , and the impact and duration of the covid - 19 pandemic is unknown.
net sales for the second quarter of 2021 were $ 715.9 million , which is a 33.4 % increase on a reported basis versus $ 536.9 million in q2 of 2020.
we also continue to experience higher than typical logistics costs as indicated in our q1 call.
however , the new delta variant clearly introduces an element of uncertainty as we move forward.
on a currency - neutral basis , sales increased 27.5 %.
with me on the phone today are norman schwartz , our chief executive officer ; ilan daskal , executive vice president and chief financial officer ; andy last , executive vice president and chief operating officer ; annette tumolo , president of the life science group ; and dara wright , president of the clinical diagnostics group.
and excluding that charge , the q2 gross margin further improved this quarter as a result of our productivity and efficiency initiatives.
in cost of goods sold , we have excluded $ 4.6 million of amortization of purchased intangibles and $ 1.2 million of restructuring - related expenses.
before moving on , i would like to highlight the broad legal settlement with 10 times genomics announced earlier this week.
