we also continue to see steady adoption of ddpcr in wastewater solutions , supported by government funding toward public health labs.
with that , i now turn over the call to ilan daskal , our executive vice president and chief financial officer.
before i begin the detailed third quarter discussion , i would like to ask andy last , our chief operating officer , to provide an update on bio - rad 's operations in light of the current pandemic - related environment that we are experiencing globally.
finally , our remarks today will include references to non-gaap net income and diluted earnings per share , which are our financial measures that are not defined under generally accepted accounting principles.
now i 'd like to take a few minutes to review our current state of operations around the world.
we 're now entering the seventh consecutive quarter of operating within the covid pandemic , and so i shall make my comments brief as we have now established an operating cadence with embedded employee safety practices.
our actual results may differ materially from these plans and expectations , and the impact and duration of the covid - 19 pandemic is unknown.
as we enter q4 , we expect covid - related demand for our products to be sequentially lower.
we are believing -- we believe we are maintaining our commitment to a safe workplace for all our employees.
our end markets continued to show improvement during q3 , with demand pickup in both life science and diagnostic markets in all regions.
the supply chain constraints highlighted in our q2 call , however , have persisted in particular , for supply and cost of plastic raw materials , electronic components and higher logistics costs.
to date , we have been able to balance supply and demand through careful management.
however , we see this supply constraint trends continuing through year - end and into 2022 , and thus increasing the challenge of adequately meeting customer demand.
q3 operating income was $ 156.8 million or 21 % of sales compared to $ 109.6 million or 16.9 % of sales in q3 of 2020.
looking below the operating line , the change in fair market value of equity securities holdings added $ 4.869 billion of income to the reported results and is substantially related to holdings of the shares of sartorius ag.
excluding the back royalties , the q3 year - over - year currency - neutral revenue growth was 9 %.
