our effective tax rate for 2020 was 11.9 % , compared to 12.2 % in 2019 , driven by higher tax credits.
i 'm especially pleased how our team always kept their health and safety , and our customers ' health and safety at the forefront , as we successfully executed in our customer - focused utility strategy , all while delivering strong financial performance that exceeded our guidance.
i believe , most of us will look back on 2020 as a year of seemingly endless challenge and yet as these challenges that prove the character and resilience of an organization and make us stronger.
like those before us for the past 137 years at black hills , we adapted , we rallied together and we worked hard , truly exemplifying our ready - to - serve commitment and the incredible spirit within our team.
throughout an uncertain and disruptive year , i admired how the black hills energy team rose to every challenge head - on.
we continue to maintain solid investment - grade credit ratings.
we are in excellent shape from a debt maturity and liquidity perspective.
slides 4 through 6 highlight the success of consistently delivering on what we said we would do.
we are fortunate to operate and stable and growing territories where most of our communities remained open during the pandemic.
as we look back at 2020 , i could n't be prouder of what our team has accomplished.
we produced strong fourth quarter and full - year financial results as the economies in our midwestern states continue to improve.
what i 'd like to refer to as delivering a high say / do ratio.
slide 14 shows our financial position through the lens of capital structure , credit ratings and financial flexibility.
our team , combined with our resilient infrastructure , advanced our reputation of delivering industry - leading reliability for our customers.
and is this priority and our genuine concern for our fellow coworkers , our customers and our communities that gave us a solid foundation upon which to confront the pandemic and build a stronger future.
for the seventh consecutive year , our safety culture produced an injury incident rate better than the utility average , demonstrating progress on our goal to become the safest utility in the industry.
