in addition , certain customers are understandably deferring payment on partial shipments.
while we clearly faced our fair share of those challenges , i want to focus my introductory comments and recognizing the tremendous execution of our badger meter teams globally , for their proactive and constructive dialog with customers to manage priorities , expectations and build trust , for their agility and effectively redesigning certain product components to provide greater flexibility on supply sources , for their unrelenting diligence and supplier and logistics management , and for their collaboration across functions to maximize our deliveries to customers.
these strategic and tactical actions by our world - class team allowed us to deliver record sales and earnings this quarter , while we added to our already record backlog.
our total sales for the third quarter were $ 128.7 million , an increase of 13.3 % over the $ 113.6 million in the same period last year.
i 'm not sure how often in the term supply chain challenges or inflation are going to be referenced during the quarterly earnings cycle over the next month , but i can only imagine it 's going to be an all - time record.
total utility water product line sales increased 12.2 %.
we believe this reference point is important for year - over - year comparability.
we are very pleased with the margin performance in the quarter , in light of widespread inflation , difficult comparisons and the dynamic supply chain impact on manufacturing operations.
in addition to the difficult comparison , our manufacturing output in the current quarter continued to be limited by supplier shortages of certain electronics and other components along with logistics challenges.
starting with gross margins , we increased gross profit dollars by $ 6.2 million and as a percent of sales , gross margins improved 20 basis points to 39.8 % from 39.6 %.
core means the designated financial metrics excluding the impact of the recent s:: can and ati acquisitions.
our earnings slides provide a reconciliation of the gaap to non-gaap financial metrics used.
we did experience growth in mechanical meter , cellular radio and beacon software as a service levels , and we continue to realize the benefit from strategic value - based pricing actions.
these factors combined more than offset increasing cost headwinds across purchase components , including higher brass , resin and other materials , as well as freight and logistics.
while these challenges are not unique to badger meter or even our industry , the ongoing headwinds have the ability to impact top line growth rates and exert increasing margin pressures.
the breadth of these challenges is greater than what we 've experienced previously , but the playback -- playbook for addressing them is not new.
