an example of this is our boydpay cashless technology , which is now live at 11 properties in four states.
we streamlined our cost structure , and we adopted a more efficient approach to doing business that touched every part of our operations.
our record third quarter performance and our results over each of the last five quarters attributes to the transformation of our business model , and the disciplined approach we have taken to operating our business.
these exceptional results have significantly enhanced our free cash flow and strengthen our balance sheet with our leverage declining to 2.5 times at the end of the third quarter.
upon reopening , we sharpened our focus on driving play from our most loyal guests.
so let 's review the operating performance and helped to make this possible.
and in our midwest and south segment , we set new third quarter records for both revenues and ebitdar , as ebitdar grew 22 % over prior year and 42 % from 2019.
in our las vegas locals segment revenues grew 35 % over last year and ebitdar was up almost 60 % , operating margins exceeded 54 % and have been at or above the 50 % mark every quarter of this year.
during our call today , we will make reference to non-gaap financial measures.
there are certain risks and uncertainties , including those disclosed in our filings with the sec that may impact our results.
while the opportunity in digital is substantial we also have strategic opportunities to further expand our traditional gaming operations.
across the country many of our hotels have been running below capacity since reopening due to a tight labor market.
in addition , we recently launched a field trial for boydpay at table games in nevada , with pennsylvania soon to follow.
as a result , we 've not been able to accommodate many rated customers who have established gaming histories with us.
in northern california construction on the wilton rancheria tribe sky river casino was progressing.
our goal is to create a tool that will make it easier for our guests to make wagers and pay for non-gaming amenities right from their smartphone.
