of course , some of the success can be attributed to the low mortgage rates and the big reassessment of living arrangements during the pandemic , but these results would not have been possible without the resiliency of our team.
in the beginning of our fiscal year , we laid out three strategic goals for 2020.
at that time , we had no idea the global economy would be turned upside down by a pandemic.
but we have an exceptionally talented group of employees who had the creativity and the grit to reinvent many of our business processes to deal with this new environment.
my comments will then be followed by a wrap - up by allan.
and it is because of them that i can tell you , we exceeded every one of our strategic goals.
we expect to recapture this activity in 2021 , which is likely to result in land spend approaching $ 600 million.
first , we grew our adjusted ebitda by more than 10 % as gross margins expanded to reflect the benefits of product simplification and the price improvements we achieved.
and those families have been living somewhere.
bob will cover our fourth quarter results in greater depth , and then i will then come back to provide our expectations for the first quarter of fiscal 2021 and provide an update on how our balance sheet , liquidity and land spending will support our growth objectives for 2021 and beyond.
by historical standards , we 've built far fewer new homes in the last decade than population growth , household formation or job growth would have predicted.
second , we generated a return on assets above 10 % , up about 1 point from the prior year as we continue to grow ebitda at a faster rate than our assets.
fourth quarter land spending of $ 116 million , but our full year total spend of $ 441 million , it was about $ 100 million below the amount we generated from the land related to home closings , reflecting the deliberate pause in spending we undertook at the onset of the covid pandemic.
now with remote work demonstrating long - lasting appeal , these deferred homebuyers are on our website , visiting our communities and buying our homes.
and finally , we achieved a net debt - to - ebitda below five times as we simultaneously retire debt and add it to our already strong liquidity position.
but it 's more than just our backlog that gives us confidence as many of the factors that contributed to sales strength last year remain in place.
