dave will provide more color on inflation and the various levers we 're able to pull to help offset its impact.
today , dave and i will discuss our results for the quarter , our updated outlook for the remainder of the year and why we believe that conagra continues to be well - positioned for the future.
slide 5 lays out our key messages for today.
first , as everyone is aware , the external environment is incredibly dynamic right now , and we see many of these challenges persisting.
references to adjusted items , including organic net sales refer to measures that exclude items management believes impact the comparability for the period referenced.
but despite the complex operating situation , the ongoing dedication , resilience and agility of our team enabled us to deliver solid q1 results on the back of strong sales.
we continue to benefit from our proven approach to brand building and the breadth of investments we 're making to increase consumer demand.
also , we will be discussing some non-gaap financial measures.
so with that as the backdrop , let 's jump right in.
these efforts drive brand health , which is evidenced by the continued strength of our sales , share and repeat rates across the portfolio.
we expect inflation to be higher than originally forecasted but we also see continued strength in consumer demand even above our original expectations.
however , we now see a slightly different path to achieving that eps.
the bulk of the incremental inflation can be attributed to continued increases in the cost of proteins , edible fats and oils , grains and steel cans since our q4 call.
descriptions of the risk factors are included in the documents we filed with the sec.
while we are making those statements in good faith , we do not have any guarantee about the results we will achieve.
i want to emphasize that this is our best current estimate of gross inflation for the full year and does not account for the impact of supply chain productivity improvements or hedging.
