and finally , looking at the financial benefit of having both small cells and fiber solutions leveraging the same asset base , you can see the markets with a meaningful contribution from both offerings are generally performing better.
our current 7 % to 8 % growth target was established in 2017 when we expanded our fiber and small cell strategy through the completion of our largest acquisition.
this record level of activity is tied to the existing wireless carriers increasing their spend to add more equipment to tower sites and dish starting to build a new nationwide 5g network from scratch.
as you saw from our second quarter results and increased full year outlook , we continue to generate significant growth in cash flows and dividends from the deployment of 5g in the u.s.
while driving strong growth in our tower business this year , the initial focus by our customers on towers has also led to some delays in our small cell deployment , shifting the timing of when we expect to complete the nearly 30,000 small cells contractually committed in our backlog.
one of the core principles of our strategy is to focus on the u.s. market because we believe it is the best market for communications infrastructure ownership , with the most attractive growth profile and the lowest risk.
as a result , we believe these timing factors will not alter our long - term returns on our investments or our ability to deliver on our growth objectives.
when combined with zoning and permitting challenges as well as the previously disclosed sprint cancellation , we now expect to deploy approximately 5,000 small cells in each of this year and next year with the remaining nearly $ 20,000 from our current backlog completed beyond 2022.
our tower investment began more than 20 years ago at an approximately 3 % yield , when we built and acquired assets that we could share across multiple customers.
tables reconciling these non-gaap financial measures are available in the supplemental information package in the investors section of the company 's website at crowncastle.com.
we believe small cells will be an even more important tool going forward as the nature of wireless networks requires continued cell site densification to meet the increasing demand for data , especially as 5g networks are deployed.
with more than 50,000 small cells on air , we have already seen how important small cells are as a key tool used by the carriers to add network capacity by reusing their spectrum over shorter and shorter distances.
the best example to point to here is philadelphia , where despite having a less mature capital base and lower node density than phoenix , it is generating a similar yield on invested capital of nearly 10 % due primarily to the higher contribution from fiber solutions.
our experience in philadelphia also highlights another important point when assessing the performance of a portfolio of assets.
adjusted for the timing impacts associated with the large in - process small cell project , where capital investment has occurred in advance of the corresponding revenue and cash flows , the incremental yield is approximately 8 %.
similar to our experience with the movements in yield and tower investments over time , as we showed back on page four , sometimes the steady climb of yields on legacy investment is less obvious as we invest in less mature assets that bring down the overall market yield.
