vitas hospital referrals are returning to pre-pandemic levels.
fortunately , vitas and roto - rooter have shown incredible speed , flexibility , and focus to remain completely open and operate safely for the benefit of our patients , customers and employees.
i believe chemed 's operational and financial performance this past year is a testament to the success of these efforts.
our vitas healthcare segment continues to be directly impacted by the pandemic.
operating during a pandemic has been exceptionally challenging for both of our business segments.
fortunately , the federal government , specifically hhs and cms have been very supportive in terms of relaxing regulations , allowing the use of telehealth where appropriate and providing pragmatic flexibility in caring for our entire patient census.
i will begin with highlights for the quarter and david , nick will follow up with additional operating detail.
the most complex issue facing vitas over the past nine months has been the disruptive impact the pandemic has had on traditional hospice referral sources , which in turn has impacted our patient census patterns.
senior housing is an important referral network for the hospice industry , given the fact that over 90 % of all half of those patients are over the age of 65.
this decline in census is a direct result of disruption in senior housing , which includes nursing homes and assisted - living facilities.
hospice referred admissions typically account for 50 % of vitas ' total admissions and a significant portion of these referrals have very short length of stays.
this is reflected in our second half of 2020 admission and census activity.
however , despite the admissions growth , our average daily census declined 2.8 % in the fourth quarter.
in addition , management may also discuss non-gaap operating performance results during today 's call , including earnings before interest , taxes , depreciation and amortization , or ebitda , and adjusted ebitda.
before we begin , let me remind you that the safe harbor provisions of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995 apply to this conference call.
our third and fourth quarter 2020 admissions increased 4.7 % and 2.8 % respectively.
