joining me on the call today are arsen kitch , president and chief executive officer ; and mike murphy , chief financial officer.
based on that strong demand , we announced and began to implement price increases across our sbs product portfolio.
our operations were affected by the february cold weather events in the south natural gas curtailments impacted production and increased energy prices.
collectively , this negatively impacted our adjusted eva da by approximately $ 6.5 million are tissue business are lower orders and shipments reflecting overall market trends.
iri market data showed a nearly 20 % decline in overall tissue dollar sales in the first quarter of 2021.
our costs were elevated in part due to the weather events slightly offset by lower year over year input costs.
as compared to the fourth quarter of 2020.
let 's discuss some additional details about both of our businesses.
our people 's focus has been key to our success , and we will continue to be so in partnership with local health agencies we have offered on site covid vaccinations across several of our facilities , and we 're continuing to offer a $ 200 incentive to each employee to become vaccinated.
consumers were destocking their pantries and retailers were working through elevated inventory levels.
we are implementing the previously announced the price increases in our sps business and are starting to see some of the benefits relative to a year ago and have a positive shift in our net.
as noted over the previous quarters , we remain focused on our top priorities during covid the health and safety of our people and safely operating our assets to serve as customers.
as you recall , we estimate that approximately two thirds of paperboard demand is derived from products that are more recession resilient , and 1/3 is driven by more economically sensitive or discretionary products.
we 're experiencing significant cost inflation at a temporary decrease in tissue demand.
please note slide two of our supplemental information covering forward looking statements.
additionally , as a reminder , we have moved our bale pulp sales to external customers back to the producing segment.
