you can see in the data that pantry loading phenomenon at the end of the first and beginning of second quarters , that has given away to a more stable demand picture for our retail customers.
our tissue business drove results with both higher sales and production volumes , to meet elevated demand.
lower input costs , particularly in pulp were also a tailwind on a year - over - year basis.
our service levels in tissue started to recover to pre-covid levels , as we continued to work with customers to fulfill orders and replenish inventory levels.
a few business highlights to mention.
our paperboard business continue to deliver stable performance , managing through uneven end - market segments with solid execution.
our current backlogs are in line with previous years and we successfully launched remagine folding carton brand , offering recycled content in sbs board.
on a consolidated basis , the company reported net sales for the third quarter of $ 457 million and adjusted ebitda of $ 77 million , which represents growth of approximately 3 % and 145 % respectively over the third quarter of last year.
let 's start with our consumer products division on slide five.
i would like to express my deepest gratitude to all of our people for their extraordinary efforts and perseverance through these challenging times.
as we have previously noted , at - home tissue demand remained elevated during the quarter.
on slide four as i noted , these last two quarters , we remain focused on our top priorities during covid , the health and safety of our employees and safely operating our assets to service our customers.
our efforts and risk mitigation strategies are making a difference in helping to reduce the risk of covid at our sites.
we continue to operate with appropriate safeguards against covid , including temperature checks , quarantine protocols , sanitation practices , social distancing guidelines , face covering requirements , remote work , travel restrictions and enhanced benefits.
our human resources and manufacturing leadership teams are doing an exceptional job of proactively monitoring the health of our workforce and ensuring that we have the proper staffing levels in place.
joining me on the call today are arsen kitch , president and chief executive officer ; and mike murphy , chief financial officer.
