importantly , the increases apart from these two areas were broad - based at each business unit and essentially all product lines achieved higher rate.
as part of our analysis , we took strong action to address the lower interest rate environment we now face compared to a year ago by conservatively modifying our discount rate assumptions.
first , we have lowered our expectation for the normative 10 - year treasury yield to 2.75 % , a reduction of 100 basis points from last year.
second , we extended the time period to grade up to that normative rate from six years to 10 years.
as we have done in previous years , we completed our annual life & group review in the quarter , which importantly includes the long - term care gross premium valuation or gpv analysis of our active life reserves.
al will provide you with much more details associated with this year 's gpv review.
we also had an improved underlying loss ratio and a lower expense ratio for the quarter.
then , by growing the company in a disciplined and prudent fashion , we would steadily decrease the expense ratio , which you can clearly see in this quarter as more of the growth earned in.
as i have said on prior calls , our strategy has been to simultaneously make substantial investments in talent , technology and analytics to position us for sustained success while streamlining our operation in order to keep our overall underwriting expenses flat.
the lower p&c expense ratio of 31.8 % largely reflected our growing premium base , which contributed approximately 0.7 points of the improvement in our underlying combined ratio.
turning to the dynamics of this hard market and starting with pricing , rate increases continued to accelerate as we achieved plus 12 % in p&c overall , up 1 point from the second quarter.
so , we believe it is still early to react too favorably to the short - term trends.
it 's very good to be with you today , and i hope you and your families are coping well.
as i mentioned in the last quarter , we expected only a relatively modest impact from loss frequency benefit because a substantial portion of our portfolio consists of insureds in essential industries such as construction , healthcare and manufacturing that were not subject to shelter - in - place restrictions.
and we continue to assume a potential for higher severity and casualty lines , like auto and general liability , as the economy is restored over time.
importantly , excluding workers ' comp , which had slightly negative rate and our very profitable affinity programs , which had a small positive rate increase , the rate change was plus 17 % , up 2 points from q2 and 5 points from q1.
