we are very pleased with the improvement in our international results , which highlights our disciplined approach to the reunderwriting and catastrophe exposure reduction we executed.
the all - in combined ratio was 92.9 % for the quarter and 96.2 % for the year , each representing the best ratios in five years.
importantly , the overall p&c rate increase remained at 8 % in the fourth quarter , consistent with the third quarter , leading to a full - year rate increase of 9 % , which was well above long - run loss cost trends.
our life & group segment produced core income of $ 6 million , and our corporate & other segment produced a quarter loss of $ 94 million , mainly impacted by a non-economic charge related to asbestos and environmental.
for p&c overall , prior period development was favorable by 0.3 points on the combined ratio.
excluding the impacts of covid in the prior year quarter , the underlying loss ratio improved by 0.8 points as we continue to recognize some of the margin built in the current accident year from the earned rate increases , as we did last quarter.
i will provide some additional information on the results , as dino indicated.
before i provide details , let me offer a few highlights on both periods.
p&c 's underlying combined ratio of 91.2 % , the 1.4 points improvement over last year 's fourth quarter result.
we are excited to have scott on board.
he 'll be transitioning with larry through the first quarter , and we 'll be handling the earnings calls after the first quarter.
in addition , retention of 83 % was higher than it 's been all year.
rates were up 13 % this quarter , achieving double - digit rate for the seventh consecutive quarter and 9 of the last 10 quarters.
international achieved a 9 % growth in gross written premium and new business growth of 15 %.
the expense ratio increased by 0.5 points to 30.9 from a one - time to up , and larry will provide more detail in the discussion on expenses.
all three operating segments produced a strong underlying results in 2021.
