one of the strengths of our fertility business is our broad product portfolio , which essentially covers the full spectrum of fertility clinics ' needs outside of pharma products.
regarding the quarter and reporting all percentages on a constant currency basis , even with continuing covid challenges , we posted consolidated revenues of 681 million with coopervision revenues of 507 million , up 1 % , and coopersurgical revenues of 174 million , up 7 %.
non-gaap earnings per share were $ 3.17.
for coopervision , we saw strength in our daily silicone hydrogel portfolio and in our biofinity franchise , along with general strength in torics and multifocals.
with both businesses outperforming , we delivered robust earnings and cash flow and expect continued strong performance moving forward.
by geography , the americas grew 6 % led by strength in biofinity and daily silicones , including nice growth from both clariti and myday.
emea was down 4 % as several countries continued managing through stringent covid - related restrictions.
moving to our frp portfolio.
our myopia management portfolio continued to strengthen , including misight growing 82 % to 3 million and coopersurgical posted a very strong quarter with paragard growing 16 % and fertility 10 %.
overall , dailies silicones are leading the market right now as health and wellness trends drive adoption , and we believe that will continue as there 's still 2.4 billion in annual global sales of older hydrogels that need to be traded up.
particular strength was noted in myday and especially myday toric as we continue rolling that product out around the world.
our silicone hydrogel dailies grew 8 % with both myday and clariti growing.
moving to some additional quarterly numbers.
i 've mentioned these products before , but as a reminder , energys is a truly unique and innovative lens that uses digital zone optics to help alleviate eye fatigue from excessive screen time.
we 're continuing to invest in sales and marketing programs and new launches , regulatory approvals and r&d to keep driving adoption on a global basis.
this market is in its infancy , but the growth is exciting , and having the only fda - approved product in misight has been a game - changer.
