i 'm rebecca gardy , head of investor relations at campbell soup company.
mark will share his overall thoughts on our fourth quarter and full year performance , as well as end market performance by division.
mick will discuss the financial results of the quarter and the year in more detail and then provide our guidance for the full year fiscal 2022.
in fiscal 2021 , the pandemic continued to present challenges across north america.
on slide 4 , you will see today 's agenda.
but i am so proud of how our teams , particularly our front - line and supply chain teams adapted and rallied to keep each other safe and meet the sustained demand for our products.
on behalf of the entire campbell leadership team , i am deeply grateful for their dedication and we continue to make their safety and well - being paramount as they work to meet the needs of our customers , consumers and our communities.
these statements rely on assumptions and estimates , which could be inaccurate and are subject to risk.
turning to slide 7 , full - year organic net sales were comparable to prior year , which included a positive fourth quarter finish to fiscal 2021 in light of last year 's remarkably strong performance.
as difficult and complex as this time has been , it has also been an extraordinary period for campbell , and we 've made clear meaningful progress advancing our strategic plan.
however , on a two - year cagr , adjusted ebit grew 5 % and adjusted earnings per share grew 14 % as we de-levered and improved our balance sheet.
the third quarter reflected the challenging comparisons to the prior year as we cycle the demand surge that accompanied the onset of the covid - 19 pandemic and navigated several headwinds , including increased inflation and executional pressures in our snacks division.
we 've evolved into a different company , one that is stronger , more agile and with growing more relevant brands that are better positioned for the future.
adjusted ebit lagged fiscal 2020 as we lapped dramatic scale and efficiency from a year ago , and navigated a much higher inflationary environment this year.
today 's remarks have been prerecorded.
in fact , three quarters of our portfolio grew or held market share for the year , reflecting our continued momentum.
