our efforts in business development and targeted deposit gathering strategies have yield successful results in deposit growth.
during the 2019 year , we repurchased 797,000 shares or roughly 2.8 % of our common stock outstanding as of the end of 2018.
combined with cash dividends , we have returned $ 48.5 million in capital to our shareholders this past year.
we continue to execute with our rise2020 initiative to enhance customer experience , drive stronger long - term growth and profitability , and improve shareholder returns.
our profitability and strong capital position enabled us to repurchase 165,700 shares of cpf stock during the fourth quarter.
bank domain name and implemented an end - to - end commercial loan origination system that will drive better efficiency.
on a year - over - year basis , the $ 371 million loan growth was broad - based in almost all loan categories.
on a sequential quarter basis , increases were led by $ 43 million in growth in consumer loans and $ 41 million in growth in resi mortgages.
the development of our new online and mobile banking platform is progressing well and our employees are excited to pilot the new platform in the first quarter.
asset quality continued to be strong with non-performing assets of $ 1.7 million , which represented 3 basis points of total assets.
key steps toward our 2020 milestones in the area of the branch and atm modernization were achieved with construction under way at our main branch headquarters and our new atm selected.
our balance sheet composition continues to move in the right direction with growth focused in loans and core deposits.
the hawaii economy continues to perform well with annual visitor arrivals set to exceed 10 million for the first time ever , continued strength in construction activity and growing importance of military in hawaii over u.s. 's indo -pacific strategy.
our total assets surpassed the $ 6 billion mark at year - end and reflected an increase of 3.5 % from the previous year - end.
importantly , core deposits contributed to all that growth with the sequential quarter increase of $ 103 million or 2.5 % led by a 3.7 % increase in non-interest bearing demand balances.
going forward , we expect that effective tax rate to be in the 24 % to 26 % range.
