we worked hard last year to rebalance our capital structure and achieve our 50 % equity target.
our objective today is to provide insight into our fourth quarter and annual 2020 results , review the estimated impact of covid - 19 on our business in 2020 as well as update you on our progress on key strategic initiatives and our outlook for the future in regards to new opportunities.
we had a very strong year in 2020.
as shown on slide four , earnings growth from continuing operations increased 13.2 % , resulting in our 14th year in a row of record earnings.
we also have other members of our management team joining us virtually.
we also achieved a consolidated return on equity above 11 % , which is something we 've done each year since 2005.
our consistent earnings track record is a significant accomplishment and represents top quartile performance among our peer group over an extended period.
we maintain significant value relative to the losses in the broader utility market.
our stock also proved to be resilient during the pandemic - related market downturn.
i note that we achieved these financial results in a year where our total capital investments once again approached $ 200 million , representing 18 % of total capitalization.
toward the end of the year , subsequent to our inclusion in the s&p 600 small - cap index , and reflecting our strong , consistent financial performance , the chesapeake stock price increased above pre-covid - 19 levels.
and our investments in 2020 will deliver strong margin and earnings growth for years to come.
this has been an extraordinary year.
our team is able to find ways to safely keep projects on schedule.
it 's a testament to the dedication of our employee team that we were able to identify safety and operating procedures that enabled us to continue throughout the year uninterrupted delivery of the essential energy services chesapeake provides.
one of the significant concerns i had as the pandemic intensified was the potential loss of momentum in the completion of our capital growth projects.
