excluding those items , our adjusted net income would be $ 118 million profit or $ 0.46 per diluted share.
global demand for natural gas is very strong for industrial power generation as well as electrical demand for cooling and heating , while supply is low - to - moderate in part due to the disciplined use of capital expenditure dollars across the entire oil and gas sector , as you are all aware of in this earnings season.
one of the major tasks in 2021 was reduce our cost of capital , which we took mighty steps forward with our 5.875 % senior notes being issued in the second quarter 2021.
and now we see and actually have it today , corporate record high natural gas production and comstock that we are selling at high natural gas prices.
we do feel the wind in our sails as we look at the third and fourth quarter of 2021 and 2022 and want to recommit to you with our goal of reducing our leverage ratio to less than two times at the end of 2022 or before if possible.
while we believe the expectations and such statements to be reasonable , there could be no assurance that such expectations will prove to be correct.
the denominator of comstock is our consistent drilling results quarter after quarter after quarter in a tier one haynesville / bossier region , which speaks volumes about all of our departments , especially our operations department.
and with me is roland burns , our present office -- operating officer ; and ron mills , our vp of finance and investor relations.
i am jay allison , chief executive officer of comstock.
but we 're super excited about what we see for the second half of this year.
i know that , that denominator is why jerry jones and his family invested $ 1 billion in comstock since august 2018 , and we believe that is why you , the bondholders , banks and equity owners buy comstock , proven rock quality , proven results over many , many years.
our g&a was down 5 % , and our noncash depreciation , depletion and amortization was up 18 % in the quarter.
production for the quarter averaged approximately 1.4 bcfe a day and was 98 % natural gas.
looking at the cost side , our production costs were up about 6 % , kind of matching the increase in production.
the proceeds from the offering were used to redeem the remainder of our 9.75 quarter bonds.
we also had about 38 % of our oil volumes hedged , which decreased our realized oil price to $ 55.82 per barrel versus the $ 61.25 we actually realized.
