turning to slide 3 now.
with that , i introduce chris koch , chairman , president and ceo of carlisle.
i hope all of you , your families , co-workers and friends are staying safe and healthy as we collectively manage through what is hopefully the beginning of the end of the covid - 19 pandemic.
reflecting on the last 12 months of uncertainty , i take great pride in how roughly one year ago the carlisle team handled the immediate threats born out of the pandemic.
and we 've also have historically provided in supplemental tables , which are available on our website.
our first actions were to ensure our teams at carlisle were taking the steps necessary to provide a safe work environment.
we ensured that our team members had access to healthcare , continue to be paid , and had company support for the difficult situations many were facing.
those considering investing in carlisle should read these statements carefully and review reports we file with the sec before making an investment decision.
during the past 12 months carlisle again proved its ability to navigate varying economic cycles with steadiness and focus , while delivering strong financial performance reconfirming our conviction in vision 2025 and it's key strategies.
this compelling strategic framework gave us clear direction and consistency emission during the tumultuous past year and will continue to guide our efforts as we accelerate into the recovery in 2021.
we enacted strict health and safety protocols based on the cdc , world health organization and best - in - class peer actions and recommendations , which contributed to a low infection rate at carlisle across the globe.
at carlisle we call this vision 2025.
the first quarter of 2021 continues to validate the hard work , effort and commitment by all carlisle employees to our stakeholders and signals that operational momentum is building across our platforms.
our next steps were to support our highly engaged and flexible workforce as they took very proactive measures to ensure we supported our customers that were providing essential services to the economy.
throughout 2020 an essential part of leadership 's job was to cut through the confusion , misinformation and complexity present in our daily lives and communicated a clear , direct and simple strategic vision for the organization that would inform our priorities , educate our collective mission and guide our everyday actions of work.
we wanted to ensure that they can count on carlisle to be there to provide the right product to the right place at the right time or what we 've come to call , the carlisle experience.
