the service guest experience standard was something new to everyone.
today , i wo n't say a whole lot.
today 's call will begin with formal remarks from management followed by a question - and - answer period.
it 's all about our company.
on the call today from management are : mel payne , chairman and chief executive officer ; ben brink , chief financial officer ; peggy schappaugh , vice president of operations & acquisitions analysis ; and steve metzger , general counsel.
and i wanted to simply state that we do a lot of communications beneath the covers of what is reported to the public.
so this went out to every managing partner , every sales manager , every field support leader , directors of support , and every employee and leader in our houston support center.
and i often get many responses to these kinds of communications.
and now they 're hearing it , not just reading it.
this audio conference is being recorded and an archive will be made available on our website later today through november 2.
so i know i 'm speaking to them as they hear this.
but i 'll just read you one.
" i have never in my life been more honored and inspired by anyone or any group of people than i have been by the amazing leadership and performance of our managing partners and sales managers and our funeral and cemetery portfolio of businesses over the last nine months and especially the last six months after the coronavirus pandemic shocked our country with both a continuing health and economic crisis.
the same is true for all the support leadership and teams , who enabled all of our frontline coronavirus battle warriors and their courageous teams of employees to remain in the battle of serving their client families and communities when it counting most.
our people have found more unique ways to give families what they need , a service to honor the lives of their love one , and the important time to agree with their family and friends , even if that meant doing visitations in small groups or having people rsvp for a service or conducting drive - through visitation or holding services outdoors.
but the goal was to truly differentiate ourselves and create even more value and personalization for each of our families.
