next , i wanted to address the global supply chain disruption on our business.
i 'll begin with the key highlights of our third quarter performance and an overview of our full year 2021 outlook.
starting with the third quarter highlights.
we experienced a strong 12 % increase in overall sales , of which 4 % was organic.
also note that both our adjusted results and full year guidance exclude our build - to - print actuation product line that supported the 737 max program as well as our german valves business , which was classified as held for sale in the fourth quarter of 2020.
our a&d markets improved 15 % , reflecting solid growth in commercial aerospace , naval defense and yet another quarter of strong performance from our pacstar acquisition.
having just completed its first year under curtiss - wright 's ownership , i 'm pleased to report that pacstar is executing very well , and its integration remains on track.
free cash flow was similarly strong , up 76 % compared with the prior year , with strong free cash flow conversion that exceeded 125 % and keeps us on track to achieve our long - term objectives.
the business is well positioned for continued strong top line growth and is closely aligned with the army 's top modernization priorities.
turning to our commercial markets.
these statements are based on management 's current expectations and are not guarantees of future performance.
joining me on the call today are president and chief executive officer , lynn bamford ; and vice president and chief financial officer , chris farkas.
we expect adjusted operating income growth of 9 % to 12 % and adjusted operating margin growth of 40 to 50 basis points to a range of 16.7 % to 16.8 %.
as we expected and as we indicated last quarter , our operations continued to be based with some supply chain disruptions caused by both delays in container shipments and shortages in electronic components , principally impacting sales within our a&i and defense electronics segment.
it 's also worth noting that we achieved higher profitability in this segment despite the wind down on the cap1000 program in our commercial power market.
we continue to aggressively manage the timing of product within our supply chain and remain encouraged by our strong backlog.
