we have prepared slides to supplement our comments during this conference call.
we will also refer to other non-gaap measures.
our fourth quarter results are highlighted by 6 % volume gains , including a 9 % increase in the e&i segment and a 12 % increase in w&p.
m&m delivered top - line results ahead of expectations , including volumes well ahead of global auto builds in the quarter.
unless otherwise specified , all historical financial measures presented today exclude significant items.
customer demand was broad - based across the portfolio , led by greater than 20 % volume growth in semiconductor technologies and high teens volume growth in water.
our 2020 form 10 - k , as updated by our current and periodic reports , includes detailed discussion of principal risks and uncertainties which may cause such differences.
going forward , our business will be centered around the secular , high - growth pillars of electronics , water , industrial technologies , protection , and next - generation automotive.
these portfolio actions will position dupont among the top of the multi-industrial peer set with top - quartile revenue growth , ebitda margins , and low cyclicality , all hallmarks of top - performing companies.
we are seeing increases in all businesses with about three - fourths of the impact in m&m.
in november , we announced our planned acquisition of rogers corporation , as well as our intent to divest a significant portion of our m&m segment.
our team sees strong customer demand across these pillars , driven by megatrends such as the transition to hybrid and electric vehicles , clean water , sustainability , and the move to 5g.
our teams have done an outstanding job monitoring our input costs and quickly translating that into price increases to remain price cost neutral for the year.
turning to slide 3 , i will provide an update on our portfolio transformation and will review how our focus on those strategic actions , balanced capital allocation , and innovation - led growth position us extremely well heading into 2022 to continue unlocking value for our shareholders , innovating for our customers , and creating opportunity for our employees.
joining me on the call today are ed breen , chief executive officer ; and lori koch , chief financial officer.
their unwavering commitment in the face of a relentless pandemic , ongoing supply chain disruptions , and logistic challenges deserves our gratitude.
