and in july , we repurchased an additional $ 125 million of shares.
we will also refer to other non-gaap measures.
i will provide comments on another overall strong quarter , including continued advancement of our strategic priorities as a premier multi-industrial company aimed at growth and creating value for our shareholders.
as a result of the principles and protocols that we adopted over the last year , we continue to operate safely and productively on site and remotely.
unless otherwise specified , all historical financial measures presented today exclude significant items.
we have encouraged all employees to get vaccinated , and where possible , we are working with local governments to facilitate access , including on - site vaccinations at some locations.
our wilmington - based office locations have fully reopened , and i have to say it is great to be back in the office with our teams.
our 2020 form 10 - k , as updated by our current and periodic reports , includes detailed discussion of principal risk and uncertainties which may cause such differences.
we also returned approximately $ 800 million of capital to shareholders during the second quarter through share repurchases and dividends.
lori will take you through the specifics but in summary , broad - based organic growth was driven by continued strength in our key end markets , including ongoing recovery in those most impacted by the pandemic.
in may , we further delevered our balance sheet by redeeming $ 2 billion of bonds , thereby reducing our gross financial debt to $ 10.6 billion at the end of the quarter.
despite a challenging production environment with escalating raw material costs and continuous supply chain and logistics constraints , strong operating discipline and quick pricing actions resulted in about 460 basis points of margin expansion versus the year - ago period.
joining me on the call today are ed breen , chief executive officer ; lori koch , our chief financial officer ; and jon kemp , president of our electronics and industrial segment.
we have prepared slides to supplement our comments during this conference call.
net sales of $ 4.1 billion were up 26 % versus second quarter of 2020 , up 23 % on an organic basis.
the organic sales growth resulted from a 20 % increase in volume and a 3 % increase in price.
