teraco complements these investments , as well as our highly connected facilities in the mediterranean by hosting the key strategic landing endpoints for subsea cables circling africa.
financially , we had a solid quarter with full year results above the high end of the guidance range that we provided this time last year.
and finally , we continue to strengthen our balance sheet by raising equity capital through the establishment of digital core reit in a highly successful ipo on the singapore stock exchange and the related sale of a 90 % interest in 10 fully utilized core data centers.
we also continue to enhance our global platform with the completion of organic development projects in multiple metros despite the continued challenges presented by the pandemic and the global supply chain in addition to strategic investments , establishing digital realty as the leading pan-african provider.
our formula for long - term value creation is a global , connected , sustainable framework.
and we made further progress on each front during the fourth quarter.
we further strengthened connections with customers with $ 156 million of new bookings with record results in both a zero to 1 megawatt and greater than a megawatt category and ended the year with $ 500 million in new bookings , a 15 % increase over the prior year.
we also announced two significant global initiatives.
we generated net proceeds of over $ 950 million from the transaction , and we retained a 35 % equity interest in the publicly traded reit.
and canada , valued at $ 1.4 billion at a 4.25 % cap rate.
reconciliations to net income are included in the supplemental package furnished to the sec and available on our website.
for a further discussion of the risks related to our business , please see our 10 - k and subsequent filings with the sec.
industry research firm gartner recently updated their global it spending forecast for 2022 , projecting a 5.1 % increase to $ 4.5 trillion , driven by companies investing in digital data growth strategies.
we are witnessing a growing trend of multinational companies across all segments , deploying and connecting large , private data infrastructure footprints on platformdigital across multiple regions and metros globally.
let 's turn to our investment activity on page 4.
we are committed to minimizing our impact on the environment , while simultaneously meeting the needs of our customers , our investors and our employees , along with the broader society and advancing our goal of delivering sustainable growth for all these stakeholders.
