this solution will help the bank manage and screen their client shareholders in order to meet anti-money laundering requirements in the know your customer compliance process.
2020 was an incredible year for dun & bradstreet.
in the midst of a challenging new environment , we 're able to successfully complete our ipo , signed a definitive agreement to acquire bisnode , and continued to transform our business with significant enhancements for our technology , data , and analytics , which are ultimately laying the foundation for our ability to execute on our near - and long - term growth strategies.
returning to the public markets last july was a major milestone for our company and allowed us to raise approximately $ 2.4 billion.
i 'd like to take some time today to discuss highlights from 2020 and our plans for 2021.
this significantly improved our financial profile and is saving us more than $ 175 million of annual dividend and interest expense.
today 's remarks will also include references to non-gaap financial measures.
we will sun-down the legacy solutions and invest in the development of our market - leading global platforms and localized solutions.
with our lower leverage and increased cash flow , we now have significantly more financial flexibility to accelerate our growth strategy , both organically and inorganically.
we also have identified approximately $ 40 million in annualized run-rate savings that we expect to have actioned by the end of 2022.
as a global company , having local expertise and knowledge helps us to engage with clients of all sizes in the region and across the globe to provide solutions and support necessary to meet their increasing demands.
the acquisition of bisnode significantly expands our footprint to additional territories that make up 40 % of the gdp of europe and are home to 50 of the global 500 companies.
our actual results may differ materially from our projections due to a number of risks and uncertainties.
the combined business , with nearly 250,000 clients collectively , will now be able to provide mission - critical solutions to an expanded european footprint with more local data , more local knowledge , and more streamlined delivery channels.
bryan will provide incremental financial details , including our expectations for 2021 , in his section.
but overall , we already have strong momentum under way and look forward to updating you on our progress in the coming quarters.
