we plan to release fiscal 2021 first quarter earnings on september 24 before the market opens , followed by a conference call.
over the past three months , our businesses -- our business changed in ways we never imagined.
then rick will share some of our fourth quarter and year - end results and provide our outlook for the first quarter.
when i look back on all that has transpired , one thing that stands out is the resiliency of the full - service dining industry.
i do n't know about all of you , but it 's felt more like 14 months.
prior to the pandemic , total annual sales for the casual dining industry was approximately $ 108 billion.
and while i do not know how long it will take the industry to recover from the significant impact it experienced , i am confident that this category will get back to the size it once was.
our ability to manage through this crisis has been driven by our commitment to prioritize guest and team member safety , invest in our team members , provide frequent and transparent communication , leverage our digital platform , and be brilliant with the basics.
when we last spoke in march , we knew the pandemic was going to have a significant impact on our business.
it has been 14 weeks since our last earnings call.
our industry plays a vital role in our communities , and that was evident in how the consumer relied on restaurants over the last several months , even in a to go only environment.
those executing at the highest level are going to continue to win , and darden is well positioned to take advantage of the opportunity.
and while on - premise will continue to play an important role as we recover , we know that the consumer still wants to enjoy and in - restaurant experience.
in fact , going out to a restaurant with friends and family is the number one activity consumers say they look forward to doing as the economy opens back up.
this posed unprecedented challenges for our restaurant and support center teams , and i am proud of how everyone moved quickly to increase to go sales , reduce costs , manage working capital and improve efficiency.
and we 've seen that as our dining rooms reopen across the country.
