in september alone , usis completed over 900 customer migrations.
also , we 'll be referring to certain non-gaap financial measures , including adjusted earnings per share attributable to equifax , and adjusted ebitda , which will be adjusted for certain items that affect the comparability of our underlying operational performance.
we had a very strong third quarter and first nine months of 2021 , a continuation of our strong outperformance last year with record revenue in the quarter of $ 1.223 billion , which was up over 14 % with core non-mortgage market and non-uc erc claims revenue growth of 20 %.
we are executing extremely well against the critical priorities of our efx2023 strategy , as we highlighted on slide 4.
certain risk factors that may impact our business are set forth in our filings with the sec , including our 2020 form 10 - k and subsequent filings.
our focus on leveraging the new equifax cloud for innovation , new products and growth is clearly driving our strong financial results.
our revenue growth has accelerated from 3 % in 2019 as we were recovering from the 2017 cyber event and investing heavily in our efx cloud transformation to 17 % last year.
these materials are labeled q3 2021 earnings conference call.
the almost 15 % topline growth was off a strong 19 % growth last year in a much stronger mortgage market.
revenue at $ 1.22 billion was up 14.5 % with organic constant currency growth of a strong 12 %.
we are on track to deliver 19 % core growth this year at the midpoint of our revised 2021 guidance.
this was our seventh consecutive quarter of double - digit revenue growth.
an archive of the recording will be available later today in the ir calendar section of the news & events tab at our ir website , www.
not only is our core growth accelerating above historical levels during 2021 in challenging covid markets and more recently , in a declining mortgage market , we are also expanding efx beyond our traditional credit deal routes to a more diverse data analytics and technology company with our investments in the equifax cloud , new data assets and npis , along with reinvesting our outperformance in bolt - on m&a in areas such as talent , government and id and fraud.
today 's call is being recorded.
adjusted ebitda margins were up -- were 54 %.
