although still below the prior year , this 2.5 % quarter - over - quarter revenue reduction is significantly less then the more abrupt quarterly revenue declines experienced in other quarters post quarter one of 2020.
we remain focused on our employee safety as we continue to work in this environment.
we had a very strong operating quarter with revenues of $ 2.44 billion , operating income of $ 133 million and earnings per diluted share of $ 1.78.
we maintained strong operating income margins of 5.5 % and had revenue growth of 21 % overall with 18 % organic revenue growth.
although covid - 19 cases in some geographies are rising again , we are in a much more stable environment and have much better visibility with respect to our operations than a year ago.
it is important to remember that in second quarter 2020 , we had several of our key geographic markets either shut down or partially shut down.
we had especially strong growth within the commercial , and that 's really across commercial but data centers and logistical infrastructure drove that and healthcare market sectors.
we had broad - based growth across our trade offerings end market sectors and across our geographic footprint.
our large project work and small quick term project work are both strong from a revenue and booking perspective.
our business trends are strong.
if you take a step back , what a difference a year makes.
and up front here , i 'm going to be covering pages four to six.
our team is experienced with this issue.
despite the less - than - difficult compare between quarterly periods due to the challenging environment in 2020 , emcor 's quarter two 2021 revenues represent an all - time quarterly revenue record for the company.
acquisition revenues positively impacted both our united states electrical construction and united states building services segments.
we are not only executing for our current customers , but are winning new work and have a very healthy pipeline of opportunities in this business.
