we have seen the success of this strategy with our nontheater tenants , where approximately 94 % are open and rent collections have improved materially.
key among early actions was to defer an anticipated gaming venue investment of approximately 1 billion , along with deferring other uncommitted investment spending of approximately 600 million.
additionally , we accessed our unsecured credit facility as a precautionary measure and suspended our monthly dividend to common shareholders.
we determined that these actions were prudent due to the extremely challenging environment in which our tenants have been operating.
early in the onset of the pandemic , we recognized the need to fortify the company 's balance sheet to maintain sufficient liquidity for the long term.
as we speak today , our liquidity remains in a strong position with cash on hand in excess of 500 million.
this large reserve of cash reflects the fact that we are to return to normalcy.
for the overview , clearly , 2020 was a year unlike any other we 've experienced since the company was founded in 1997.
overall , we are pleased with both the progress and trajectory of our recovery as it is reflected in a continued increase in cash collections as we entered 2021.
however , early indications from around the world indicate that when product is available and flowing , there is robust consumer demand.
however , as we announced in our quarterly disclosure on january 7 , we generated positive cash flow in the fourth quarter and anticipate this trend to continue.
as greg will discuss in more detail , our theater tenants are still primarily challenged with limited film product , which should subside as we progress through 2021.
throughout the year , we made continuous progress.
the recent paydown of our credit facility balance reflects this positive momentum and demonstrates our increased confidence.
while our properties are still impacted by locally mandated closures and capacity restraints , performance and customer demand continued to improve , which we believe demonstrates our final thesis of people 's desire for experiences.
joining me on the call today are company 's cio , greg zimmerman ; and company 's cfo , mark peterson.
