strong box - office numbers for warner bros.
separately , the new protocols from the cdc for fully vaccinated people reflect the opportunity to achieve increasing levels of normalcy and life as we once knew it.
across our portfolio , consumers have been exhibiting their desire to experience out - of - home entertainment , and our tenants businesses have been beneficiaries of this pent - up demand.
at a macro level , with the broad increase of vaccine deployment , we are seeing a meaningful improvement in consumer confidence and stabilization of the economy as is evidenced by employment and gdp data.
said another way , even with the challenges and limitations of the current operating environment , these results indicate that consumers still value the theater experience for new movie titles.
our increased cash collection levels reflect strengthening the businesses and an increasingly more positive environment for the experiences our properties deliver.
at the end of the first quarter , our total investments were approximately $ 6.5 billion with 354 properties in service and 93 % occupied.
having positive momentum across all these areas should propel us toward the achievement of our goals.
as i stated earlier , the trends appear to be very favorable at this point , including vaccinations , consumer demand and exhibition recovery.
as we continue to manage the business , we remain laser focused on our goals for 2021 , including our exit from covenant relief , reestablishment of a dividend and a return to sustained growth.
during the quarter , we also made progress on our strategic capital recycling activities and utilized proceeds from dispositions and stronger collections to pay off the remaining $ 90 million balance on our $ 1 billion unsecured revolving credit facility.
the spending included build - to - suit development and redevelopment projects that were committed prior to the covid - 19 pandemic , as well as the acquisition of a newly constructed topgolf facility in san jose , california , for $ 26.7 million , which was acquired primarily with cash received from topgolf as payment of a portion of their deferred rent balance.
with increases in vaccinations and the fast approach of summer , we see continued strong performance in our drive - to value - oriented destinations.
consumer subscribed to streaming services for all - you - can - eat buffet content and generally are n't interested in paying an upcharge for an individual release.
studios and content providers do not consider pvod , svod and other forms of at - home viewing as replacements for theatrical exhibition.
our seasonal businesses are closed in the normal course.
