working together we got through 2020 by serving our customers , taking care of each other , and driving the best results possible given the circumstances.
if demand is this strong now , we think that when the vaccines are more fully distributed , and cities reopen our business will really hum.
this positive trend in spite of a worsening pandemic , and renewed shutdowns in our markets gives us even more of a cause for optimism.
the fact that this is likely to coincide with our traditional leasing season with its higher seasonal demand , positions us especially well.
in real estate demand is the unsolvable problem , without it no other economic factor matters , and in our business both urban and suburban , we see plenty of it.
admittedly though , pricing remains weak , but there are signs of the beginnings of improvement.
we also see declining forward concessions.
turning to the business , we are encouraged by the recovery in demand in all of our markets , and especially in our urban sub-markets.
because of this more complex picture than usual , we thought it was particularly important that we reinstate guidance to give investors a better idea of management 's view of the year.
the interplay of our expectations of increasing occupancy , pricing that is improving , but will be lower than last year 's pricing until mid-year or so and the amortization of 2020 and ' 21 concessions , creates considerable modeling complexity for us , and for our investors and analysts.
our guidance is at the wider than usual range to account for the multitude of factors , both positive and negative , that may impact our business in 2021.
but just as our reported results lagged our actual operating environment on the way down , they will also lag it on the way up.
you may remember that on prior calls , i made clear that the impact of lower rents and higher concessions in 2020 , and currently will take some time to fully manifest itself in our reported numbers.
that impact arrived in the form of our fourth quarter 2020 same store revenue results , as we continue entering into new leases , and renewing existing leases at lower rents , reflecting the post - pandemic leasing climate , as well as amortizing concessions from leases written in 2020.
our featured speakers today are mark parrell , our president and ceo ; michael manelis , our chief operating officer and bob garechana , our chief financial officer.
all of this is of course premised on the continuing progress in controlling the virus , and an assumption that other general economic conditions remain supportive.
