as i said from the start of the pandemic , when challenging times pop-up unexpectedly , cash is king.
our solid operating results in q1 coupled with our strong liquidity position demonstrates that the measures we 've taken will allow us to successfully navigate through this challenge.
our actions will benefit as we 're going forward as things continue to move toward a more normal state.
and i 'm confident that our disciplined approach to operating the business will result in our continued success throughout the balance of fiscal 2021.
while gary will provide financial details , i 'll offer top level comment by noting that while our q1 a&d sales were lower than prior year due to covid 's impacts on commercial aerospace.
our portfolio diversity allowed us to overcome this headwind as we substantially increased our adjusted earnings per share from prior year , due to the strong performance from our other operating units.
we continue monitoring the situation on a regular basis , and our primary goals remain the same ; stay ahead of the curve , provide a safe working environment and protect the health of our employees.
the fundamentals of our portfolio remain strong and our goal remains the same , to create long - term shareholder value.
this makes it difficult for our solutions to be replaced by alternative sources.
our navy business remained strong and well - funded.
esco will continue to benefit from our leadership positions in several niche markets , where we deliver set of unique and highly technical products and solutions , specifically designed to meet our customer needs.
our test business continues to outperform with increased margins and our usg business saw some meaningful calendar year - end spending across the utility customer base.
our teams are actively addressing the challenges of today , while continuing to focus on being even stronger tomorrow.
coupled with the cost reduction actions we recently implemented , usg delivered an adjusted ebitda margin of nearly 25 % , up from approximately 19 % in the prior year 's q1.
we 're fortunate to have strong and experienced leadership teams across the company , who continues to demonstrate their ability to effectively manage costs , to meet changing market demands.
escotechnologies.com , under the link investor relations.
