in november 2020 , we are pleased that the american heart association announced the launch of an initiative , called target aortic stenosis , a quality improvement program aimed to develop optimal standards of care.
structural heart patients were severely impacted beginning in march , experiencing significant difficulties entering the system , which also had a profound impact on second quarter procedures and even though healthcare systems adapted to the challenge , the resurgence of covid that began late in the year continues to impact structural heart patients , who need care.
despite unprecedented challenges throughout the year , i 'm proud of our team 's steadfast dedication to our patient - focused strategy.
we continue to invest in developing solutions that extend lives , improve the quality of life and offer greater value for the healthcare system.
before we discuss fourth quarter 's results and our expectations for 2021 and beyond , i want to spend a minute reflecting on 2020.
along those lines , we celebrated some exciting milestones in 2020 that directly impacted patients.
in tavr , despite headwinds , more than 100,000 patients benefited from treatment with sapien valves worldwide.
finally , a quick reminder that when using the terms underlying and adjusted , management is referring to non-gaap financial measures , otherwise they are referring to gaap results.
as we indicated at our investor conference , we expect full year sales between $ 4.9 billion and $ 5.3 billion representing mid-teens underlying growth on a year - over - year basis.
looking into 2021 , while we expect the pandemic to continue to impact the global healthcare system , we remain optimistic about the year ahead.
in surgical structural heart , we launched our konect aortic valved conduit and inspiris became the leading aortic surgical valve worldwide.
we 've seen early positive clinical evidence across the tmtt platform , physician feedback is encouraging and patient outcomes have been distinguished.
during the year when job losses impacted many families across the globe , edwards prioritized protecting our employees and we grew our team to 15,000 worldwide.
these statements include , but are n't limited to financial guidance and expectations for longer - term growth opportunities , regulatory approvals , clinical trials , litigation , reimbursement , competitive matters , and foreign currency fluctuations.
and in critical care , we met the increased demand for core pressure monitoring products due to the pandemic , and we 're proud that we were able to help over 1 million patients globally with our monitoring technology.
just after the close of regular trading , edwards lifesciences released fourth quarter 2020 financial results.
