now , turning to several recent tavr clinical trial highlights , last week at the tvt conference , data on the vancouver 's tavr economic study were presented which further demonstrated the favorable economic value of our sapien 3 platform , a comparison of 1100 patients was conducted to assess the economic impact of next day discharge.
" we were encouraged by the clear signs of recovery during the second quarter.
vaccine adoption in key regions have contributed to an increasing number of patients seeking and , most importantly , receiving treatment.
at edwards , our dedication of providing innovative solutions for people fighting cardiovascular disease around the world motivates our employees every day.
otherwise , they are referring to gaap results.
we never stopped our aggressive pursuit of breakthrough technologies with the potential to help an even broader group of patients.
last year , we noted that we 're in the midst of the onset of this tragic global pandemic.
finally , a quick reminder that when using terms underlying and adjusted , management is referring to non-gaap financial measures.
all four product groups delivered large increases in sales led by tavr.
we are pleased to report better than expected second quarter sales of $ 1.4 billion , up 44 % on a constant currency basis from a year ago period.
turning now to our recent results.
total company sales increased sequentially versus q1.
this quarter , more than 30,000 patients were treated with sapien valves , an indication that more patients are benefiting from our life changing technologies than ever before.
fortunately , we are now experiencing encouraging signs of increased patient confidence to visit their position.
these statements include , but are n't limited to : financial guidance and expectations for longer - term growth opportunities , regulatory approvals , clinical trials , litigation , reimbursement , competitive matters and foreign currency fluctuations.
just after the close of regular trading , edwards lifesciences released second quarter 2021 financial results.
