we believe the annual housing supply demand imbalance is unlikely to be rectified by new construction before 2022.
the second relates to eagle 's high - performing , well thought geographically advantaged operations that can take advantage of these market opportunities.
let me start with some foundational comments about market conditions.
housing construction is an important driver for both sides of our business , and single - family starts are especially important for gypsum wallboard.
one relates to market conditions , which are on an improving trajectory in most respects.
there are positive short - term , mid-term , and long - term dimensions to the robust housing - related demand for our materials.
we 'll now move to the question - and - answer session.
as for the short term , wallboard is installed on walls and ceilings in the later phase of the building construction process after framing has occurred.
another important end - use segment for us is repair and remodeling.
there are two overreaching reasons for this.
this supply demand pressure will challenge housing affordability , but given the fed 's commitment to keep interest rates low for an extended period , this should translate into a multi- year construct -- a continuation of favorable mortgage rates environment.
this means that the recent increase in starts and permits will have the greatest impact in the months ahead.
we ended the quarter with $ 143 million of cash on hand , and total liquidity at the end of the quarter was $ 888 million , and we have no near - term debt maturities.
research shows that purchasers of existing homes spend money on remodeling materials in the wake of their home purchase , to make the home their own and more fully conform to their needs and tastes.
this is in part due to the pace of what is possible for homebuilders to get into production.
pandemic has resulted in a surge in home buying , and that demand that has been swelling over more than a decade of under - building is now being realized.
