today , i 'm confident that the decisions made in 2020 will be a driving force behind our future performance.
the difficulties we experienced in the third quarter of 2020 were driven by the continuing impact of the covid - 19 pandemic , which continued to hinder our performance with decreased demand as a result of mandatory government shutdowns , including schools , restaurants , food service and business closures being our biggest headwind.
2020 is shaping up to be one of the most challenging periods ever for our industry and fresh del monte produce.
you may also visit the company 's website at freshdelmonte.com for a copy of today 's release as well as to register for future distribution.
also during the quarter , we continued our efforts to diversify our product line and the channels we market our products in with the launch of our newest product , the pink glow del monte pineapple.
this important sustainability initiative reduces our carbon footprint and brings us closer to our 2025 commitment to reduce emissions by 10 %.
since we last spoke , we added two new containerized vessels to our new fleet , the del monte rose and the del monte harvester , replacing vessels we have previously chartered.
the variety is produced on our farms in costa rica.
today , our three mann packing facilities and fresno fresh - cut facility are now operating under one roof , which we anticipate will enable us to improve gross profit in our fresh and value - added products segment by approximately $ 10 million on an annual basis ; a benefit which we expect to achieve over the next 12 months.
joining me in today 's discussion , mohammad abu-ghazaleh , chairman and chief executive officer ; and eduardo bezerra , senior vice president and chief financial officer.
we believe this will allow us to shift assets that better serve the long - term growth of the company.
in october , we published an update to our 2018 - 2019 corporate social responsibility report that includes progress toward our 2025 commitments.
volume decreased 27 % , unit pricing increased 7 % , and unit cost increased 15 % compared with the prior - year period.
we believe we are on - track to realize most of our cost savings actions planned for 2021.
measures we have taken over the past year demonstrates the significance of our goals to increase sales revenue , enhance margins and maintain our track record of improved cash flow generation.
