we are also making significant changes in our approach to political and legislative engagement and advocacy.
taking appropriate actions to address our recent challenges and fostering a strong culture of compliance , ethics and integrity , we are deeply committed to creating a culture in which compliance is endemic in second nature and where our leaders prioritize and encourage open and transparent communications with all of our stakeholders.
this focus is absolutely essential for our success as an organization.
our commitment starts at the top and extends throughout the organization.
before i get into our results , i wanted to kick off the call with a few words on a critical area of focus for firstenergy.
we are working to ensure that every leader is actively engaged in setting the proper tone and creating an environment where not only our words , but our actions align with our core values and behaviors.
we 're building a world - class compliance function to underpin this effort , including bringing on hyun park as our new senior vice president and chief legal officer in january.
these efforts , together with enhanced policies and procedures , will help to bring additional clarity around appropriate behaviors at firstenergy.
we also have several other executives available to join us for the q&a session.
hyun is the right person to step into this role at this time , and he will be instrumental in driving this cultural shift.
steve talked about a lot of the important work that is being driven by the new management team.
with this additional transparency , my goal is to make it crystal clear exactly what efforts we support.
at the same time , we 're taking decisive actions to rebuild our reputation and brand and focus on the future.
we will also be appointing a chief ethics and compliance officer , who will manage a dedicated team of compliance professionals and enhance our efforts to improve our compliance function by shifting from a decentralized to a more centralized model.
our activity in this space will be much more limited than it has been in the past , with closer alignment to our strategic goals and with additional oversight and significantly more robust disclosure.
in addition , we 'll be designating compliance ambassadors throughout the company to act as boots on the ground , ensuring the entire organization understands the critical importance of compliance and what it means for each individual.
