but omnichannel growth was positive , nonetheless.
last quarter , i talked about entering our fiscal 2021 momentum.
that was certainly the case in our first quarter.
and the momentum gained strength as the quarter progressed , enabling us to deliver exceptional top line and bottom line results , even against the ongoing challenges of store closures in europe and canada and congestion at the u.s. ports , leading to abnormally lean inventory levels.
we 're excited to have him on board.
on a sequential basis , comps dramatically accelerated through the quarter , led by our stores.
a mid-teens decline in february due mainly to launch calendar shifts and tax refund delays gave way to strong triple - digit gains in march and april as we lapped the onset of the covid pandemic last year and the disruption caused by the shutdown of our store fleet.
this stellar performance would not have been possible without all of the associates whose dedication to the success of our company and whose passion for creating incredible experiences for our customers drives our business every day.
finally , we believe u.s. government stimulus and tax refunds provided incremental positives in the quarter.
but our stores were n't the only highlight.
i often say we have the best team in retail , and our performance in q1 serves as a testament to the strength of our team.
perhaps more impressively , even with the challenges i mentioned , our sales performance was not only strong relative to last year 's unprecedented first quarter , but also versus q1 2019 , where we saw low single - digit growth versus a strong result that year.
this year 's quarter includes pre-tax charges of $ 2 million related to the impairment of one of the company 's minority investments , and $ 2 million primarily related to severance costs in connection with the reorganization of certain support functions.
athleisure and fitness consumer trends continued to drive strong demand across genders and families of business.
we are currently in the process of assessing the footaction fleet to determine the best decision for each location.
first , as we 've discussed on prior calls , the flexibility we have with respect to our portfolio management will allow us to take advantage of a number of lease expirations over the next two years.
