as a reminder , we have three large manufacturing facilities and several smaller locations in india.
at this level , q2 was a momentum - building quarter for flowserve , as our bookings inflected upward and we now have clear line of sight to earnings growth.
the higher level of bookings and our improved operational performance have provided us the confidence to raise our outlook further for the full year.
our revised adjusted earnings per share guidance is now $ 1.45 to $ 1.65 for 2021.
we were encouraged by our bookings of $ 953 million , which is nearly an 18 % year - over - year improvement.
since the start of the pandemic , we indicated that recovery in our end markets was expected to be directly correlated with the progress being made with covid - 19.
each country and geography are at different stages in fighting the pandemic.
after about six quarters of destocking , we are now expecting these distributors to rebuild their inventory levels over the coming quarters.
but on a global basis , a clear pattern has emerged as countries roll out vaccines , covid cases decline dramatically and then mobility and consumption begin to improve.
second , we believe major project activity will emerge and begin to recover in the back half of 2021 and into 2022.
first , we expect to continue to grow our mro and aftermarket bookings.
these statements are based upon forecasts , expectations and other information available to management as of august 6 , 2021 , and they involve risks and uncertainties , many of which are beyond the company 's control.
we appreciate you participating in our conference call today to discuss flowserve 's second quarter 2021 financial results.
there are several factors that contribute to our confidence in the outlook.
most of those projects were put on hold as operators were both assessing the covid impact and reducing their capital spending budgets.
we continued to anticipate bookings in this $ 950 million range in this year 's third and fourth quarters , assuming continued progress with covid.
