we also believe that datacom trends are becoming more positive and we anticipate modest growth in this area.
we remain focused on driving efficiencies , which helped generate margins that were at their highest levels in over a year.
as a result , earnings per share also increased year - over - year and sequentially to a record $ 1.10.
our second quarter played out largely as anticipated combined with an unexpected positive surprise from automotive programs , which represented the most significant driver of upside in the quarter.
in fact , automotive revenue grew more than 30 % from the first quarter and more than doubled from a year ago.
we continued to see a recovery from traditional automotive customers and even stronger growth from new automotive programs such as lidar , which are beginning to contribute to our growth in a more meaningful way.
in summary , we are pleased to deliver a record second quarter result and are optimistic that the third quarter will produce another record performance.
however , this was more than offset by stronger telecom revenue.
datacom revenue did moderate as we anticipated.
part of our telecom growth was driven by our optical transport systems program at cisco , which we have discussed on past calls.
we continue to aggressively pursue new opportunities that will further our position and driving growing revenue and profitability and enhance long - term shareholder value.
revenue from industrial lasers was approximately flat and was slightly better than expected.
we had another record quarter with q2 results that exceeded our guidance and support our longer - term optimism.
in optical communications , we had anticipated that continued telecom strength would offset continuing softness from datacom products that are deployed inside the data center.
we also anticipate industrial laser revenue to increase sequentially as well.
with me on the call today are seamus grady , chief executive officer and csaba sverha , chief financial officer.
