in the third quarter among other enhancements we added a competitor keyword automation as soon as campaigns go live through our improved smart algorithm , which uses over 100 million national and local us businesses to drive further optimization.
these represent stable and recurring revenue streams that are growing very rapidly with big addressable markets that we are penetrating.
the increases in these digital categories in q3 led to year - over - year same - store revenue growth and for the fourth consecutive quarter , year - over - year adjusted ebitda growth.
also , importantly our results are in line with previous guidance we had given at the end of the second quarter , and again , when we did our most recent refinancing about a month ago.
our results in the quarter evidence continued strong growth in our digital - only subscriber counts and in our digital marketing solutions segment.
q3 adjusted ebitda was $ 102.1 million with a margin of 12.8 % for the quarter and that brings our last 12 months adjusted ebitda to $ 467 million , up meaningfully from 2020.
you can find reconciliations of our non-gaap measures to the most comparable us gaap measures in the earnings supplement.
we were able to post strong financial results this year along with multiple refinancings despite the lingering impact of the covid - 19 pandemic as well as the inflationary pressures that have risen here in the us and impacted so many.
we continue to remain on our aggressive plan to delever our balance sheet.
we have been able to materially reduce the cost of our debt , our ongoing cash interest expense and we have continued to lower our leverage.
in addition , we will be discussing some non-gaap financial information during the call today.
our aggressive debt repayment this year , combined with strong financial performance has allowed us to opportunistically refinance our term loan b . this refinancing was completed in october , just last month.
in fact , this was our second refinancing in 2021.
the accelerating growth is built on new product launches such as usa today sports plus , a new premium personalized sports subscription product that went live in early september.
we also implemented the use of first - party data as we strive to help businesses reduce their dependence on third - party cookies.
we now allow businesses to leverage their own customer data to target look like audiences at both google and facebook.
