this impressive achievement was realized ahead of schedule and provides the roadmap for our other businesses as we seek to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and work with our partners to reduce the carbon footprint of the products that we sell.
we entered the pandemic year from a position of strength following 11 consecutive quarters of comp sales growth in our footwear businesses.
our overall performance in a difficult environment reflects the strong competitive positions of our retail and branded concepts , the strength of our footwear focus strategy , and our success capitalizing on opportunities to bolster these positions.
as a result , fiscal ' 22 is off to an incredibly strong start with the first quarter that meaningfully exceeded our expectations.
in each successive quarter , our people worked with great tenacity and success to improve top and bottom - line results to close the gap pre-pandemic levels , drive the recovery , and return to profitable growth.
our outperformance was driven by better - than - anticipated results at every division , led by record first - quarter revenue and profitability at journeys.
even as the pandemic continued to impact our businesses to varying degrees , the pace of our recovery accelerated each month and overall in q1 , reflecting stellar execution , combined with a temporary boost from u.s. government stimulus , and pent - up demand as the economy reopens faster than anticipated.
we were pleased that every business in every channel contributed to the beat versus expectations with the stores delivering the biggest gain.
i 'd like to begin today by outlining some of the key highlights from the quarter.
we sustained last year 's 64 % growth and added another 43 % on top of that.
participants also expect to refer to certain adjusted financial measures during the call.
these statements reflect the participants ' expectations as of today , but the actual results could be different.
our online business , from a strong foundation prior to covid - 19 , generated double - digit operating margins due to our focus on full - price selling , disciplined marketing spend , and shipping - and - return policies to reinforce profitability.
to advance our digital capabilities at an even faster pace , we announced we promoted parag desai to the newly created position of chief strategy and digital officer.
as vaccines rolled out , consumers began their return to life phase more quickly than expected , gathering with family and friends in social outings and occasions.
there are several factors that shaped journeys ' exceptional q1 performance starting with superb execution by its merchant team.
