consumer demand was robust , and we nonetheless believe our results would have been even stronger had we been able to maintain historic levels of inventory.
despite multiple covid variants , bottlenecks across the supply chain , labor shortages , and higher costs , we capitalized on the opportunity of a strong consumer spending environment to drive our business forward.
our exceptional results underscore the earnings power of our business model , the solid foundation for growth we built through the strong competitive positions of our retail and branded concepts , and the successful execution of our footwear - focused strategy.
there are several key achievements that defined the year.
throughout fiscal ' 22 , we accelerated our recovery from the pandemic and delivered record results for our footwear companies even as we navigated a number of acute challenges.
we grew revenue more than 35 % over last year and 10 % over fiscal ' 20.
a very strong holiday season concluded an outstanding year.
trend - driven teens who are looking for the most current assortment of fashion footwear that is always evolving , whether they want to make a statement to stand out or want to fit in and be just like their friends , come to journeys and schuh to buy multiple brands and seek advice from our knowledgeable fashion advisor salespeople in our youth - focused full - service environment.
we are not dependent on anyone brand for the majority of our revenue , but rather 10 or more brands typically constitute 80 % of what we sell.
shifting now to the fourth quarter.
participants also expect to refer to certain adjusted financial measures during the call.
teens view us as the unparalleled fashion authority , choosing fashion - right brands and styles , validating whatever brands we 're currently selling , and they are increasingly turning to our concept for their branded footwear needs.
overall , our results highlight the work we 've done to create and curate leading footwear brands and importantly , to strengthen our position as the leading destination for teen and youth - branded fashion footwear.
these statements reflect the participants ' expectations as of today , but actual results could be different.
in today 's channel - less world , where the consumer can truly shop anywhere , journeys ' and schuh 's growth underscores the tremendous loyalty developed with existing customers and compelling proposition offered to new customers.
turning now to our branded side.
