to continue our focus on paying down debt , our board recently reduced our quarterly dividend payment to $ 0.25 per share for the quarter.
over the course of the pandemic , we experienced a decline in overall occupancy levels at several of our federal facilities.
due to the decline in the overall federal population , we have previously announced that the federal bureau of prisons had decided not to renew three of our bop contracts that are scheduled to expire during the first quarter of 2021.
more recently , the president issued an executive order directing the attorney general to not renew doj contracts with privately operated criminal detention facilities.
during the fourth quarter , our operating divisions continue to face challenges associated with the ongoing covid - 19 pandemic.
today , we reported our fourth - quarter and full - year 2020 results and issued our final guidance for 2021.
marshals service , which is also under the u.s. department of justice , does not own and operate its facilities.
our frontline employees remain focused on providing high quality services inhumane care for all those entrusted to us.
we 've provided these essential services to government agencies at the federal and state levels under both democratic and republican administrations and during times when either party has been in control of the legislative branch of the government.
the u.s. marshals service contracts for bed capacity which is generally located in areas near the federal courthouses to house pre-trial offenders who have been charged with federal crimes under the laws passed by congress.
despite these challenges , we believe our company remains resilient and is underpinned by long - term real estate assets and supported by contracts entailing essential government services.
during the past year , our employees have shown incredible commitment and resilience as our company has managed through unprecedented times and we are very proud of their dedication.
we will conclude the call with a question - and - answer session.
and we expect first - quarter 2021 affo to be between $ 0.48 and $ 0.50 per diluted share.
ensuring the health and safety of all those in our facilities and our employees has always been our number one priority.
moving to our capital structure.
