our ames strategic initiative that will consolidate operations , increase automation , support e-commerce growth , and create a new global data and analytics platform for ames by the end of 2023 is on track.
revenue increased 2 % over the prior - year quarter of 4 % excluding the impact of the seg disposition.
adjusted ebitda was $ 76 million , excluding unallocated costs and adjusted earnings per share was $ 0.43.
we are executing well in a very complex operating environment.
we are pleased with our third quarter performance , which was slightly above our expectations.
i want to spend a minute discussing it before moving to the segments.
finally , from today 's remarks , we 'll adjust for those items that affect comparability between reporting periods.
demand remained very healthy across our product categories supported by a strong housing market , repair and remodel activity , and consumer spending.
we are closely monitoring the situation due to the spread of the covid - 19 delta variant and we 'll make adjustments as needed to be responsive to government guidelines and to ensure the safety of our employees and customers.
as we navigate through the second year of managing our businesses during the global pandemic , we continue to prioritize protecting employees even the restrictions in the united states , canada , united kingdom , and australia are evolving.
we 're currently carrying record levels of backlog in both the cpp and hbp segments due to transportation disruptions and tight labor availability , which limited our ability to catch up with demand.
we reiterate our expectation to realize annual cash savings of $ 30 million to $ 35 million and inventory reductions of the same magnitude when the benefits of the initiative are fully realized.
such statements are subject to inherent risks and uncertainties that can change as the world changes.
we expect this to further improve margins in the years ahead.
our businesses are proven to be resilient and we are reiterating our full - year guidance.
with me on the call is ronald kramer , our chairman , and chief executive officer.
