the timing of deal announcements and completions is what determines quarterly results.
we reported first quarter revenue of $ 68.9 million , operating profit of $ 7.2 million and net income per share of $ 0.09.
our quarterly revenue was 3 % higher than last year and our operating profit and earnings per share compared to a loss last year.
given that this quarter followed one where we had our best quarterly revenue ever , we see these as respectable results that mark a solid start to the year.
or a discussion of some of the risks and factors that could affect the firm 's future results , please see our filings with the securities and exchange commission , including our annual report on form 10 - k , quarterly reports on form 10 - q and current reports on form 8 - k.
we are also pleased that after quarter end , we further accelerated the pay down of our debt and that we have made good progress toward our recruiting goals.
i will now comment very briefly on our operations as we continue through the pandemic , then on the state of each of our businesses , then speak on each of our key financial metrics.
as i 've said in each recent quarterly call , our firm has operated well throughout the pandemic.
it is particularly strong in the u.s. where it is running at a record pace.
so our goal is to get largely back to that over the next few months in most of our office locations.
we see this in the fact that we are winning a significantly larger number of assignments than we did last year just pre-pandemic or the year before , which benefited from a good economy and no unusual health risks.
and joining me on the call today is scott bok , our chairman and chief executive officer.
but we do think working from the office is better for our team 's productivity , efficiency , training , morale and other reasons.
i am patrick suehnholz , greenhill 's head of investor relations.
in - person attendance will naturally grow as more people get vaccinated and the virus risk declines , both generally and particularly for our people , most of whom i expect have been or will be vaccinated.
to the extent people are still working from home and may be for some time to come , we have proven that we can be very effective at both executing for existing clients and winning new clients in that format.
