importantly , we see nearly all of those areas has poised for significant improvement in 2021 , given current market conditions and what we can see in our pipeline of assignments.
we reported fourth quarter revenue of $ 140.7 million , which was our best quarterly performance ever , an operating margin of 57 % and net income of $ 2.71 per share.
our quarterly revenue was up 32 % and earnings per share was up 158 % from the same period last year.
for a discussion of some of the risks and factors that could affect the firm 's future results , please see our filings with the securities and exchange commission , including our annual report on form 10 - k , quarterly reports on form 10 - q and current reports on form 8 - k.
in sum , we had a very strong finish to the year , resulting in very respectable pandemic year results on the top and bottom line , all consistent with our commentary on the past couple of quarterly investor calls.
we also benefited from an expanding array of financing advisory roles that are neither traditional m&a nor traditional restructuring.
we benefited from particularly strong results from our european m&a business and our u.s. restructuring business.
clearly , quarterly revenue , of the scale we achieved requires a lot of things to go right.
looking at our full year results.
our private capital advisory business made a meaningful contribution as well , albeit considerably less so than in the prior year.
we generated multiple , very significant m&a completion fees , multiple very significant restructuring completion fees and a long list of smaller fees to go with them.
in other words , our profit in one quarter exceeded what was expected for five quarters.
joining me on the call today is scott bok , our chairman and chief executive officer.
i am patrick suehnholz , greenhill 's head of investor relations.
our revenue for the year was highly concentrated in a few busy areas , as many regions and sectors were heavily impacted by the pandemic and related constraints in economic activity and thus produced only modest revenue.
in that regard , note that , our employees own about half of the economics of the firm through stock and restricted stock.
