we expect the fourth quarter tax rate to be approximately 42 % , while our full - year 2021 tax rate is estimated to be between 38 % and 40 % , in line with our previous guidance.
this business will significantly enhance the scale and diversification of our product and technology portfolio by introducing premium quality spunlace nonwovens to our offerings.
we also completed the first full quarter with mount holly under glatfelter 's ownership , which contributed to record operating profit for the airlaid segment.
slide 3 of the investor deck provides the key highlights for the third quarter.
we reported adjusted earnings per share of $ 0.21 and adjusted ebitda of $ 32 million.
these statements speak only as of today and we undertake no obligation to update them.
airlaid materials performed well above expectations , driven by the higher than anticipated demand for our tabletop and wipes products.
this action was an addition to the 8 % price increase announced earlier in the year.
this strong demand positively impacted segment profitability in the quarter.
for example , electricity prices more than doubled during the quarter in key european countries like germany and the uk , where we have significant manufacturing operations.
we believe these price actions appropriately reflect the current market conditions as we continue to provide our customers security of supply of high quality products and responsive service during this very dynamic business environment.
we also experienced sequential volume growth of 10 % in our hygiene products category after being negatively affected in the first half of the year as consumers destocked.
on the call today to present our thirds quarter results are dante parrini , glatfelter 's chairman and chief executive officer and sam hillard , senior vice president and chief financial officer.
this is ramesh shettigar , vice president of esg , investor relations and corporate treasurer.
also our contractual pass - through arrangements with customers allowed us to offset elevated raw material costs and maintain solid margins during this volatile inflationary period.
in addition , we successfully executed a $ 500 million bond offering that is primarily being used to finance the jacob holm acquisition.
