we 're pursuing a $ 100 - per- car content opportunity driven by trends that are reshaping the auto industry and reimagining the car.
with respect to mark - to - market adjustments , gaap accounting requires earnings translation hedge contracts and foreign debt settling in future periods to be marked to market and recorded at current value at the end of each quarter , even though those contracts will not be settled in the current quarter.
for us , this increased gaap earnings in q4 by $ 86 million.
let 's turn to mobile consumer electronics , where 2021 sales increased 7 % , and we surpassed the $ 2 billion in sales for the first time.
our currency hedges protect us economically from foreign exchange rate fluctuations and provide higher certainty for our earnings and cash flow , our ability to invest for growth , and our future shareholder distributions.
and earlier this week , west pharmaceutical services , a global leader in injectable drug administration , announced a long - term supply agreement and technology investment in corning to enhance injectable drug packaging systems.
in automotive , 2021 sales in our environmental technologies segment increased 16 % to reach an all - time high $ 1.6 billion despite weakness in the automotive market related to chip shortages.
our non-gaap or core results provide additional transparency into operations by using constant - currency rates aligned with the economics of our underlying transactions.
we delivered another strong quarter of year - over - year growth.
since 2017 , environmental technologies sales have increased more than 40 % while global car sales had decreased by 20 %.
today , we reported fourth quarter and full year 2021 results.
our core performance measures are non-gaap measures used by management to analyze the business.
we 're very pleased with our hedging program and the economic certainty it provides.
in fact , our portfolio has enabled the delivery of nearly 5 billion doses of covid - 19 vaccines so far.
they 're also available on our website for downloading.
for the fourth quarter , sales were $ 3.7 billion , up 12 % year over year.
