if and when more deals come to fruition , we will announce them.
in keeping with our focus on the customer , we are going to continue taking steps to create new offerings and make targeted bets in blockchain gaming and cryptocurrency.
we recognize that our special connectivity with gamers provides us a unique opportunity in the web 3.0 and digital asset world.
we have learned from the mistakes of the past decade when gamestop failed to adapt to the future of gaming.
with that said , here is a brief recap of what changed in fiscal year 2021 : we installed a new management team comprised of technology veterans and introduced a more equity - focused executive compensation structure to increase alignment with stockholders ; we refreshed the board with stockholders and individuals who possess records of value creation , while reducing individual director compensation ; we ended relationships with high - priced external consultants who were costing the company millions of dollars per year ; we hired hundreds of new individuals with e-commerce , operations and technology experience , while eliminating many redundant and unnecessary roles ; we recapitalized the company 's balance sheet after raising approximately $ 1.67 billion in capital ; we expanded our product catalog to seize more market share in areas such as pc gaming , personal electronics and virtual reality ; we invested in our fulfillment network by standing up new facilities on the east coast in york , pennsylvania , and on the west coast in reno , nevada ; we invested in our systems and tech stack after years of decay and neglect ; we invested in u.s. - based customer service and established a new facility in south florida ; we invested in a dedicated blockchain team and new capabilities to drive the development of initiatives such as our nft marketplace , which we expect to launch by the end of the second quarter ; we see significant long - term potential in the more than $ 40 billion market for nfts.
it is important to stress that gamestop had become such a cyclical business and so capital starved that we have had to rebuild it from within.
the first year of our transformation was about starting to turn gamestop into a customer - obsessed technology company , one that has wider offerings , more competitive pricing , faster shipping , stronger customer service , and an easier shopping experience.
we launched a redesigned app , which includes an enhanced user interface , improved scalability for a larger product catalog , and more functionality to support exclusive offers and promotions.
although there is a lot more hard work and necessary execution in front of us , gamestop is a completely different company today than it was at the beginning of the fiscal year.
we grew powerup rewards pro members by 31.8 % on a year - over - year basis , taking total membership to approximately 5.8 million.
shifting to the fourth quarter , i want to briefly touch on a few areas.
we also formed a partnership with razer to support sustained growth in pc gaming and console accessories such as controllers and headsets.
it was an important period of foundation building , significant investment , and cultural change at gamestop.
we continued to establish new and expanded brand relationships , including with pc gaming companies such as alienware , corsair , and lenovo.
this helped grow our pc gaming sales by 150 % for the full year.
we have commenced discussions with an array of layer ones and layer twos about prospective partnerships that include development benefits and financial incentives.
