today , we will discuss our operational and financial results for the three months ended march 31 , 2021.
in texas , where the impact of the storm this quarter was approximately $ 13 million , our industry has borne a disproportionate share of the financial burden.
we remain hopeful that perspective legislation and regulatory changes and / or litigation will provide material relief.
because of our ongoing commitment to financial strength and liquidity , while avoiding debt , our balance sheet remains in good shape.
the severe winter storms in texas and japan had an aggregate negative impact on income from operations of approximately $ 15.5 million.
our underlying business remain very strong.
with that in mind , we are continuing our strategic review of our international business , carefully balancing the advantages of near - term cash generation with the need for capital to optimize long - term growth.
adjusted for the storms impact in japan and gross margins increasing , and we expect that the growth capital requirements for these businesses will decline significantly during the year.
on a consolidated basis , we achieved a record first quarter revenue and added to our meter and rce counts , even though the first quarter is a historically slow quarter for customer acquisition.
we expect to have more to say on that in the coming quarters.
rces increased by 10,000 to 450,000 and meters increased by 7,000 to 572,000.
at gre international , we ramped up our investment to expand our customer base in sweden and dealt with wholesale price spikes , most notably in japan , but to a lesser extent in scandinavia.
at genie retail , absent the texas storms impact , our domestic business would likely have achieved record adjusted ebitda despite the challenges of the pandemic environment.
gre 's revenue reached a new high as consumption per meter again increased significantly compared to the year - ago quarter and churn remained subdued.
avi goldin , our chief financial officer will follow with a deeper dive into the quarter 's financial results.
now , operator , back to you for q&a.
