these rate actions provided more options for policyholders , including reduced benefit and stable premium options , which continue to be selected at a higher frequency by our policies.
also , references to statuary results are estimates due to the timing of the filing of the statutory statements.
we reported a very strong operating performance in the second quarter , continuing the reasonable momentum across our businesses while making progress on our strategic plan to create long - term value.
our actual results may differ materially from such statements.
enact reported very strong results with adjusted operating income of 135 million compared with 126 million in the prior quarter and an adjusted operating loss of 3 million in the prior - year period.
following our prepared comments , we will open up the call for a question - and - answer period.
our strong performance over the past several quarters provide a solid foundation for us to write the next genworth 's chapter.
strategic actions we 've taken to reduce debt and excellent progress to further reduce risk associated with our legacy ltc insurance blocks.
today , you will hear from our president and chief executive officer , tom mcinerney ; followed by dan sheehan , our chief financial officer and chief investment officer.
we encourage you to review all of these materials.
as of june 30 , 2021 , approximately 59 % of genworth 's ltc policyholders have accepted all premium increases in full , 27 % have taken a reduced benefit option and 14 % have opted for a non-forfeiture option.
moving forward , our primary strategic focus in the near term is to continue to reduce holding company debt.
we are working to develop even more benefit options for our policyholders to choose from when faced with the rate actions.
related to the obligation to axa , i mentioned last quarter that axa has initiated a lawsuit in the u.k. against an insurer seeking to recover payouts it made to policyholders for missed payment protection insurance , a significant portion of which genworth agreed to reimburse as part of the 2020 settlement.
the board and i continue to believe that a future ipo of enact is the best option to do just that.
since 2013 , we have reduced wholly company debt by a total of approximately 2.2 billion.
