we caution you not to place undue reliance on these statements.
highlighting the resiliency of our business model and our ongoing track record of execution across market cycles.
we delivered record third quarter results , despite the incremental challenges that emerged during the period from covid - 19.
we also surpassed $ 2 billion of quarterly adjusted net revenue for the first time in our history with record margins and produced all - time high quarterly adjusted earnings per share and adjusted free cash flow.
joining me on the call are jeff sloan , ceo ; cameron bready , president and coo ; and paul todd , senior executive vice president and cfo.
as we detailed at our investor conference just a short time ago on september 8th.
the trend toward accelerated digitization coming out of the pandemic has benefited our business by reinforcing that mode of competition , and this quarter provided further proof points of the wisdom of our approach to drive differentiated growth across the four pillars of our strategy.
we now have 25 active prospects in our issuer pipeline with aws , up from 20 last quarter and four at the end of 2020.
as we discussed in september , we also continue to build our pipelines with aws to include additional fintechs , neobanks and embedded finance players spanning multiple geographies.
first , we extended long - standing relationships with both citi and cibc , as a reflection of our promise as a top quartile software - as - a - service or saas technology company with unmatched worldwide payments expertise.
we 're also pleased to have renewed our issuer relationship with cibc a top 10 customer in north america that spans both its consumer credit and debit portfolios for an extended term.
we also currently have 10 letters of intent with institutions worldwide , six of which are competitive takeaways ; two of our recent loi 's have gone to contract.
our durable partnerships with some of the most sophisticated and complex institutions globally speak to our competitiveness , well into the remainder of this decade.
more on this new pillars to our strategy in a moment.
starting with citi , we are delighted to have furthered our relationship with one of our largest commercial card customers for another eight years.
this agreement highlights a key element of what is already today a successful b2b business at scale.
