hopefully , everyone has had a chance to review the news release we issued earlier today.
given the short - term volatility of comparisons due to the impact of the covid - 19 pandemic , we have focused our comparisons to 2019.
please note that unless otherwise stated , all comparisons are to 2019 results that have been rebased to reflect the move of our european innerwear business to discontinued operations as well as the exited c9 program at mass and the dkny intimate apparel license.
with me on the call today are steve bratspies , our chief executive officer ; and michael dastugue , our chief financial officer.
i can't express enough how grateful and proud i am of their dedication , their focus on safety and commitment to serving our consumers and customers under extremely challenging circumstances.
our associates are our greatest strength , and i want to make sure they 're recognized for all their hard work.
it 's hard to believe it 's been a year since my first day at hanesbrands.
i also had the chance to tour our new york design center , spent time with that incredible team and see a wide range of innovative new products in our pipeline for both innerwear and activewear.
to that end , over the past month , i 've finally been able to get out , see parts of the business and interact with some of our amazing associates.
it was exciting to see high levels of traffic in our stores.
reflecting back , it 's clear this is truly an amazing global company with a number of competitive advantages , iconic brands , distribution scale , owned manufacturing , a deep commitment to sustainability , a strong balance sheet and 61,000 passionate associates across more than 47 countries.
i 'm inspired by their commitment and talent.
and let me tell you , consumers are out shopping.
it 's great to be able to speak to such strong results on my first earnings call.
then i 'll return with some closing comments.
we feel good about the opportunities we are finding , and we 'll continue to update you along the way.
