our sales by geography for the fourth quarter were 30 % into europe 14 % into south america , and 56 % into asia.
we remain focused on preserving cash and liquidity while managing the aspects of the business that we can control.
importantly , we achieved our second lowest quarterly cash cost per tour done since going public.
as the chinese ban on australian coals continue during the forced first quarter , we were able to monetize our higher than normal inventories on chinese spot volumes , which partially offset some of the impact of the depressed pricing environment experienced in our natural markets.
we continue to take the necessary measures to adjust our workplace environment to comply with social distancing , and personal hygiene guidelines set forth by various health organizations to protect the health and safety of our employees while maintaining our operations.
global steel production remains on its recovery path to pre pandemic levels.
at this point , the price started its gradual decline , hitting its low of $ 110 per metric ton in late march.
as anticipated , chinese by nicolas was low , join there.
excluding china the rest of the world grew at a more moderate pace of 2 %.
on the other side , you have australian base premium calls that have been impacted by high volatility and low pricing.
during the first quarter we saw covid - 19 the chinese fail on australian calls have a continued impact on both pricing and demand across the mecole industry.
after my remarks , dell will review our results in additional detail , and then you 'll have the opportunity to ask questions.
unfortunately , the metco markets remain split in a two tier pricing system due to the ongoing chinese ban of australian coal imports.
new year 's celebrations in february.
however , it remained subdued for a longer period than expected following the holiday.
the end of our first quarter also coincided with the exploration of our collective bargaining agreement with the united mine workers of america on april 1.
