we 're continuing to follow social distancing procedures.
and now connie will begin with her remarks.
i am very proud of the performance of our company and our employees during this covid - 19 pandemic.
while all of us face uncertainties regarding the trajectory of the virus and its implications for our pace of economic recovery , what is clear is the strength and resilience of our businesses , the dedication of our employees and our commitment to supporting our customers and our economy throughout this period.
on the call , we 'll use non-gaap financial measures to describe our operating performance.
our long history of providing essential services for most of our state ; our strong liquidity across our enterprise ; the stabilizing effect of decoupling and other regulatory mechanisms at our utility ; and our bank 's conservative approach to risk , low - risk loan portfolio , low - cost core deposit base and strong capital position.
please bear with us again if we have any delays or mixed audio quality during the call.
hawaii's unemployment rate improved to 13.9 % in june after peaking at 23.8 % in april.
this strong foundation , coupled with other factors that benefited earnings , enabled us to deliver solid financial results for the second quarter , $ 0.45 per share compared to $ 0.39 per share in the same period last year , while achieving important progress on our long - term goals.
we 're seeing the effects of reopening of our local economy and unprecedented federal stimulus , which is estimated to have delivered approximately $ 7.7 billion in funding to our state thus far.
we 've also seen areas that have maintained stability throughout the covid period such as our federal government and military presence.
while cases per capita in hawaii have generally been lower than other states throughout the pandemic , we have seen an uptick in cases recently , which our state is working to address.
then greg will review our financial results and outlook.
to help accelerate this transition , we filed a pilot project for ebus make - ready infrastructure.
so our executives are in different locations today.
we also continue working to help reduce carbon emissions from the transportation sector.
