together , stage 1 and 2 projects , if completed as planned , are expected to add about 650 megawatts of solar and about 3 gigawatt hours of storage to our system by the end of 2023.
this reflects our continued financial performance and our confidence in our future prospects.
i 'm proud of the commitment of our employees as we work to support our customers through the challenges of 2020 , protect fellow employees and care for our communities , all while continuing to deliver solid consolidated financial results and advance long - term priorities.
last week , our board approved our third consecutive annual dividend , raising the quarterly dividend per share from $ 0.33 to $ 0.34.
this has included extensive actions across our company , including at our utility suspending disconnections , providing payment options to help customers manage their bills and proposing to hold base rates flat on oahu to help keep rates down.
while down from 2019 , our consolidated 2020 earnings include strong utility [ phonetic ] results , driven by good regulatory mechanisms and the utilities focus on cost savings , while the bank performed well given pandemic - driven economic challenges.
in addition , based on the utility 's strong financial results , at year - end , hei provided $ 2 million for hawaiian electric to be the founding sponsor of the aloha united way , hawaii utility bill assistance program to help families and all island pay utility bills.
we continue to aggressively advance renewable energy and storage procurement , filing nine stage 2 rfp purchase power agreement.
the rps apm established in the performance base rate making docket incentivizes us to continue to focus on exceeding the statutory milestones , and we will talk about that in a moment.
similarly , our bank offered loan deferrals , temporarily suspended fees and deployed $ 370 million in paycheck protection program funding to support approximately 4,100 small businesses representing about 40,000 local jobs.
we outperformed our 2020 renewable energy portfolio milestone of 30 % with 34.5 % rps for the year , while lower demand due to the pandemic contributed to that result , if electricity used had been the same as 2019 , we would still have exceeded the milestone at 32 %.
three of those have now been approved by the puc.
in 2020 , we achieved consolidated net income of $ 197.8 million and earnings per share of $ 1.81.
these actions reflect who we are as a company and our long - standing esg focus.
now , connie , will begin with her remarks.
we also filed applications for our two self - build storage projects and continued moving stage 1 rfp projects forward.
