in personal lines , we are in the midst of a transformation to provide a more contemporary experience in product.
a detailed description of those risks and uncertainties can be found in our sec filings.
our commentary today includes non-gaap financial measures.
these statements are not guarantees of future performance , and actual results could be materially different.
once again , our outstanding underwriting capabilities and consistent execution on strategic initiatives becomes increasingly evident with each quarterly earnings report and reinforces my confidence about the future for the hartford.
in the third quarter , we reported core earnings of $ 442 million or $ 1.26 per diluted share ; 8 % growth in year - over - year diluted book value per share , excluding aoci ; and a trailing 12 - month core earnings roe of 12.5 %.
just a few final comments before chris begins.
commercial lines reported stellar margins with an industry - leading 87.2 underlying combined ratio and another double - digit top line growth , reflecting higher new business levels , continued strong retention and solid renewal price increases.
however , results were impacted by hurricane ida , higher pandemic - related excess mortality in group benefits and the boy scouts of america settlement.
we returned $ 634 million to shareholders in the quarter from share repurchases and common dividends and $ 1.6 billion for the nine months ended september 30.
the positive momentum continued with written premium growth , margin expansion , operating efficiencies and a significant return on alternative investments.
our teams continue to execute exceptionally well.
the confidence we have in our business is also evidenced by the announcement that we have increased our share repurchase program by $ 500 million , bringing the total authorization to $ 3 billion through the end of 2022.
looking through to the underlying results.
for the call today , our speakers are chris swift , chairman and ceo of the hartford ; beth costello , chief financial officer ; and doug elliot , president.
with strong cash flow generation , we will continue to have a balanced capital deployment approach to support growth and investments in the businesses with capital return to shareholders.
