at newport news , the team was awarded a $ 3 billion contract for the refueling and complex overhaul of cvn 74 uss john c. stennis , and also received a contract modification for construction of the 10th virginia - class block v submarine.
new contract awards during the quarter were approximately $ 5.3 billion , resulting in a record backlog of approximately $ 49 billion , of which approximately $ 25 billion is funded.
chris will provide some color on a few of the key awards for the quarter during his remarks.
shifting to activities in washington.
we were pleased that the recently released summary of the fiscal year 2022 president 's budget request affirm that maintaining u.s. naval power is critical to reassuring allies and signaling u.s. resolved to potential adversaries.
of note , the budget summary cited continued recapitalization of the nation 's strategic ballistic missile submarine fleet , investment in remotely operated and autonomous systems and funding for the next - generation attack submarine program.
brian 's career at ingalls has been remarkable , and hii has truly benefited from his leadership.
after serving as president of ingalls since 2014 and with more than 40 years of service , brian cuccias retired on april 1.
and we look forward to understanding budget details for these and other national security priorities when that information becomes available as well as funding levels requested for the department of energy and the department of homeland security.
and i am very confident that our strength , agility and positive momentum resulting from enduring the impacts of covid - 19 will serve as key catalyst to help us leverage our historic backlog , to generate strong free cash flow and create long - term sustainable value for our shareholders , customers and employees.
and as i prepare to close , i 'm very pleased with the operating rhythm the team is achieving , which led to the third consecutive quarter of solid program execution and financial results.
i trust that everyone is staying healthy and safe.
completion of these transactions sharpens the focus of our technical solutions business into areas where we believe our unique capabilities and close customer relationships will drive strong organic revenue growth and margin expansion.
also in the remarks today , mike , chris and tom will refer to certain non-gaap measures.
the improvement was driven by higher risk retirement at ingalls and improved performance to technical solutions.
operationally , we had a solid quarter , making consistent progress across our shipbuilding and technical solutions programs.
