turning to slide 9 , what record revenue generation , strong margins , and consistent capital spend add up to as a strong free cash flow at all our operating mines.
silver demand for the use -- to be used for it , energy , has increased and is continuing to increase.
realize the current silver market is only a little more than a billion ounces , so that 's a huge increase in the demand for silver for energy use.
first , silver as fundamental to the transition to the lower carbon energy , with solar power being a key renewable to make it happen.
and so to do that , you need silver mined in reliable countries.
we 're going to start with slide 4 , where you 'll see there 's four key messages that we 're trying to communicate.
now we mined 86 % of our tons last year with the ucb method , but we we did n't speak about this until almost the end of the year because we wanted to make sure we understood how the cycle worked , confirmed how it would improve our seismicity management , determine how we manage dilution , and consider the impacts on the workforce.
aside from our safety and environmental performance , our most significant achievement , though , was the implementation of the new underhand closed bench or the ucb mining method at the lucky friday.
and most silver is mined in china , peru , and mexico.
and then the final message , and really what we 'll spend the bulk of this conference call on is what a great year hecla had operationally as well as financially.
hecla has the united states largest reserve of any mining company and produces more than 40 % of all the silver mined here.
and that small amount allows us to use offset credits set at very , very low cost to get net neutral.
with that , i will pass the call to phil.
we are the most reliable silver producer.
our third message is that on the esg front , hecla stands out with the safety record of our employees that is 40 % below the national average , and we are also net neutral on greenhouse gas emissions for scope 1 and 2 because we have among the smallest emissions in our industry.
i 'm anvita patil , hecla 's assistant treasurer.
