finally earlier this month we received our gresb 2021 real estate assessment results.
we had another solid quarter of leasing activity on positive rent spreads.
our stabilized lease percentage remains over 92 % for making good progress on our remaining 2021 and our 2022 expirations.
in the 3rd quarter , we had a robust same property noi growth as our office and studio tenants continue to pay rent and repay deferred rent.
we also successfully executed on multiple city related acquisitions all in spite of the pandemic headwinds.
there is definitely growing momentum around our tenants return to the office.
as we sit today , more than 18 months into the pandemic , the advantages of our focus on top tier tech and media markets on building and reinvesting in a state - of - the - art portfolio and are maintaining a strong balance sheet , have never been more evident.
some have already reiterated at least a portion of their employees over the last few months , while others are working toward either a year - end or early 2022 return.
we purchase a major site north of london to build sunset waltham cross which will be a large scale purpose - built facility with 15 to 25 new stages and we expanded our services platform with the purchase of the transportation and logistics companies , star waggons and zio studio services , enhancing our existing clients experience , while capturing significant additional production - related revenue.
the combination of record funding and fundraising by vcs , media can be spending of over $ 100 billion on content and significant national health and research spending has led to continued growth in hiring within the industries that drive demand for our assets , primarily tech media gaming and life science.
across our markets , office leasing activity was notably elevated or showed healthy indicators such as a shift away from short - term renewals to new and expansion deals.
they will be joined by other senior management during the q&a portion of the call.
we 're obviously very focused on maintaining our leasing momentum as the office market recovers , which mark is going to discuss further in a moment.
sublease space contracted almost without exception as a result of tenants , both pulling listings or backfilling space.
moreover , this quarter was once again included in certain disclosure prompted by covid 19 business changes , which we will maintain as business operations further normalize.
we also saw a positive absorption around many of our metro areas in submarkets , and in most cases , for the first time since the pandemics onset.
