as well , the coordinated efforts of our technology , property management and human resources groups , enabled us to effectively transition 90 % of our employees to a work - from - home model , in less than 30 - days.
return on average assets for the period was 2.8 % and return on average equity was 21 %.
full - year 2020 net income equated to $ 448 million or $ 5 per diluted share.
the fourth quarter capped off remarkable year of growth for the organization.
during the period , we continued to support our impacted banking clients through the approval of covid - related loan modifications.
this dividend is payable on february 26th , 2021.
yesterday , our board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend of $ 0.12 per common share , an increase of 33 % from the prior quarter.
the balance of total active deferrals as of december 31 was $ 241 million -- excuse me , $ 240 million , down from $ 968 million at the end of the second quarter.
except to the extent required by law , we expressly disclaim any obligations to update earlier statements as a result of new information.
net revenues at the broker - dealer increased for the same period by $ 37 million or 33 % , primarily due to robust volumes in structured finance , public finance and fixed income businesses.
please note , that the information presented is preliminary and based upon data available at this time.
additionally , we established a agency mbs group at hilltopsecurities , which is a securitized product platform that complements our mortgage origination businesses.
this reflects a reduction in the reserve balance of $ 6.2 million from the third quarter , which was driven by fourth quarter payoff , lower - than - expected charge - offs and a shift in the economic outlook.
in the second area of strategic sourcing , the focus was to take advantage of the size of our organization , in order to improve our pricing and discounts with all vendors.
also , we improved the alignment of leadership and management through affecting succession plan and making certain large organizational changes , such as the primelending staff reorganization in 2018 and the restructuring of hilltop 's [ indecipherable ] organization in 2019.
as we embark upon 2021 , we believe that hilltop is well positioned with established businesses , synchronized leadership and substantial capital.
