however , as a percentage of sales , these costs declined 800 basis points to 46.4 % from 54.4 %.
we have not seen a slowing of orders or significantly higher cancellation rates even with the longer wait times for furniture.
while we do not know how long we will see these dramatic increases in incoming orders , we believe that the importance and the value of the home has risen dramatically in the past year.
we believe this trend will continue for 2021 because of the large backlog of orders , the very strong housing market , the government cash subsidies and the increased demand for furniture and other home related products.
even though our undelivered backlog is up almost 4 times last year , our current incoming orders are continuing at the elevated pace we have seen since january.
our supply merchandising and distribution teams have been tirelessly working with our suppliers and shippers to bring in the product to fill orders and reduce our record backlog.
we 're very pleased with the results of the first quarter and i 'm encouraged with the continuing momentum that we 're seeing with increased written sales , higher traffic and higher closing rates and average tickets.
we 'll be sharing more on the campaign early next month.
the delays in shipping challenges are well - known now , but they are well beyond anything that our industry has experienced.
we believe there are a number of good additional markets that we can serve within our distribution footprint and are actively investigating and pursuing new store opportunities.
i 'd like to provide an update on our operations during the quarter , specifically , our supply chain efforts as well as our distribution , home delivery and service areas.
we 're planning to increase our inventories as the production and product flow improves and are investing in additional warehouse capacities in our distribution network.
we expect to open a third store in northeast austin , texas later this year.
we opened a new store in myrtle beach , south carolina this past quarter.
actual results may differ materially from those made or implied in such statements , which speak only as the date they are made and which we undertake no obligation to publicly update or revise.
this projection excludes the impact from vesting of stock awards and any potential new tax legislation.
