we hedge this currency exposure over a 10 - quarter horizon to protect our operating income.
these numbers reflect the beginning of what we expect will be a gradual and steady recovery over the coming quarters as the world emerges from the economic effects of the pandemic and regains its confidence in air travel once again.
the results we reported in our news release , last night , represent a solid start to the year and were largely consistent with our expectations.
and we were more than pleased with how well we performed in controlling costs and delivering stronger margins.
our hexcel team has transformed this downturn in demand into an upturn in productivity , cash management , inventory control , and efficiency.
commercial aerospace sales of a $ 147.6 million , decreased 59.7 % compared to the third quarter of 2020 as destocking continues to impact our sales.
the rollout of vaccines is encouraging in some countries , yet , unfortunately , slow in others.
it can not be recorded or rebroadcast without our express permission.
some tightness in our supply chain is always a risk , and even more so with the ever - present threat of pandemic - related slowdowns , shutdowns , and shortages.
as we have previously communicated , we expect to reduce overhead costs by the middle of this year on an annual basis by approximately $ 150 million.
domestic travel in the us is showing signs of improvement and may boom by year - end.
commercial aerospace represented approximately 48 % of the total first - quarter sales.
we expected that second half of 2020 and our first for this year would represent the troughs or the low point of the demand cycle resulting from covid - 19.
now , with q1 behind us and a clearer view ahead , we 're even more convinced that our expectations were correct , which we continue to validate via regular customer interactions , including customer site visits where this can now be accomplished safely.
such factors are detailed in the company 's sec filings and last night 's news release.
turning to our three markets.
