growth has been solid in all of our markets , the u.s. , canada , south america and spain.
consolidated income from operations increased $ 11.6 million to $ 12.9 million this quarter , powered by a $ 9 million year - over - year increase in revenue less direct cost of revenue.
consolidated sg&a expense , meanwhile , was substantially unchanged year over year.
we are successfully reducing the overhead in our traditional communications segment and redeploying those resources to support and accelerate the growth of our higher - margin businesses in the fintech and net2 phone - ucaas segments.
fully diluted earnings per share increased to $ 0.51 from $ 0.04 in the year - ago quarter.
also within fintech , our boss revolution money transfer service increased revenue 73 % to $ 13.3 million.
we continue to build out our global disbursement network , and this quarter passed an important milestone , opening corridors to southern asia with the addition of pakistan and nepal.
within our fintech segment , nrs added over 1,500 units to its pos terminal network this quarter.
looking ahead , we are laying the groundwork for the first expansion of our origination market.
i 'm joined today on the call by marcelo fischer , idt 's chief financial officer.
at january 31 , nrs had over 13,700 billable units in the network.
we 've picked up the pace of network expansion significantly.
the reach of our disbursement network and significant transaction volumes into key destinations enable us to provide a highly competitive c2c service from a number of countries.
in the second quarter , we launched our integration with slack , the leading channel - based messaging platform , building on previous integrations with and microsoft teams.
our initial mvno effort in partnership with sprint struggled but we are confident that this time around , we will do much better.
our continued growth validates our geographic strategy but also reflects the accelerated rate at which we have been able to develop and deploy enhancements to the offering itself , most notably adding integrations with some leading crms and communications platform.
