trio has also seen strong demand and has currently posted $ 60 per ton higher than the summer fill values.
solid cash flow and ebitda highlighted our fourth quarter and put a positive end on a unique year.
the encouraging trends we saw emerging in the fourth quarter are continuing into spring as commodity markets show strength across both our fertilizer and oilfield segments.
the last couple of months , we have seen gradual yet sustained improvements in our ability to combat the covid - 19 pandemic , we are optimistic that the good news will continue as cities begin to relax restrictions now that significant portions of our most vulnerable populations are protected.
during today 's call , we will refer to certain non-gaap financial and operational measures.
we wish the world well.
these risks and uncertainties are described in our periodic reports filed with the sec , which are incorporated here by reference.
our nutrient business ended the year with significant momentum and has n't slowed down in the first quarter.
with environmental and sustainability goals , front and center for so many oil and gas management teams , regulatory bodies and governments , the need for responsible and innovative use and reuse of water is the key to capturing the full potential of the delaware basin.
full cycle water management means minimizing traditional source water use and produced water disposal with environmentally friendly treated produced water recycling.
we called the bottom in the potash market on our november earnings call and recent pricing and demand has exceeded our expectations.
we announced another potash price increase in february , up $ 50 per ton , increasing our posted potash prices $ 140 per ton above summer fill levels.
these statements are based on the information available to us today , and we assume no obligation to update them.
strong commodity pricing in soybeans , corn , wheat , palm oil , sugar , cotton and bottoms in the cocoa market in the coffee market , all in strength to a continuing global demand.
with me on the call today is intrepid 's co-founder , executive chairman , president and ceo , bob jornayvaz.
customers have been eager to secure product as prices continue to move up and have locked in some volumes through second quarter with additional spot buying occurring throughout the spring and farmers who are eager to replenish nutrients at today 's crop prices.
