this transaction follows the successful transfer of our u.s. pension liability in october 2020 and will allow us to focus more on growing the core business organically and through acquisitions.
before we begin , i 'll provide a brief overview of our second quarter gaap results.
revenue increased 34 % to $ 692 million.
segment operating income increased 206 % [ phonetic ] to $ 114 million , which equates to segment operating margin of 16.5 %.
these adjusted results exclude certain non-operating and non-recurring items , including but not limited to asbestos - related charges , restructuring , asset impairment , acquisition - related items and certain tax items.
we are all focused on ensuring itt delivers on its commitments hour after hour , while taking care of each other , our families , and our customers.
actual results may vary materially , due to , among other items , the factors described in our 2020 annual report , on form 10 - k and other recent sec filings.
before reviewing our results , let me talk a little bit about itt 's sustainability efforts.
i continue to be encouraged by the progress we are making , by the opportunities that remain , and by the commitment and the passion i see from our workforce.
this has been a pivotal quarter for itt.
in the coming weeks , we will be releasing our 2021 sustainability report supplement , which will show our commitment to environmental , social , and governance initiatives.
on the operational front , over the past few months , i 've had the privilege of meeting our teams in person at our sites in italy , california , the netherlands , and the northeast.
on july 1 , we divested a subsidiary that holds all of our legacy asbestos liabilities to a portfolio company of warburg pincus.
we are now beginning the next chapter in itt 's history.
importantly , itt is indemnified from any further responsibility for all pending and future legacy asbestos claims.
these statements are not guarantees of future performance or events and are based on management 's current expectations.
