included in these alternative flow results is also the gtr net outflow that i just noted.
so now , let me turn to the results.
we achieved a new record in the second quarter for long - term net inflows totaling $ 31 billion.
and as always , we 'll follow the status of covid and local guidelines as we transition back to the office , meeting client needs , helping them ensure continued health and well - being of our employees.
growth was led by net inflows into institutional etfs , fixed income , and but as alternative capabilities.
and as you can see on slide 3 , the key capability areas where we have scale , investment readiness , competitive strength , drove growth again in the quarter.
we also have $ 5 billion in direct real estate capital available for deployment.
we continue to innovate with strategies for retail investors through the launch of products such as inreit and the partnership we announced with ubs , in which we will provide bespoke global property investment services for management clients of ubs in switzerland , other parts of emea and asia.
massmutual has committed over $ 1 billion to various alternative strategies , materially increasing the speed with which [ phonetic ] we can get to market for the benefit of our clients.
but before i begin , i 'd like to take a minute to recognize the hard work of our team at invesco , like most everybody , our employees have been working in a work - from - home or hybrid environment for more than a year now , and they 've achieved these results in a very challenging environment.
this improvement was driven by uk retail , primarily inflows into the european equity funds and lower net outflows during the quarter across a number of fixed income and uk equity capabilities.
strong cash flows being generated from our business improved our cash position , helping build a stronger balance sheet and improving our financial flexibility for the future.
this [ technical issues ] 82 % improvement from one year ago.
turning to flows across the asset classes.
of the $ 121 billion in aum growth , approximately $ 66 billion is a function of increased market values.
we ended the quarter with $ 1.525 trillion in aum.
