stock prices are near all time highs and vc fundraising is on track for a record year , which is translating into a war for talent , growth in job postings and additional real estate procurement.
it 's been just over 1.5 years since the pandemic began , and we are really starting to see the revitalization of cities across the west coast.
city drillers are returning to their urban apartments and once again embracing city life.
after a tough 2020 , residential net absorption is approaching 100,000 units in our five markets driven in large part by high density areas like hollywood , south of market , downtown seattle and downtown austin.
i 'll start with some macroeconomic comments before getting into our leasing and capital allocation.
restaurants , bars , coffeehouses are full , concerts and sporting events have returned and slowly but surely , more companies are coming back to the office.
ffo was $ 0.98 per share in the third quarter.
quarter over quarter , the $ 0.10 increase was largely driven by the acquisitions to date , noi contribution from our one paseo office and our residential projects as well as $ 0.015 of lease termination fees.
the recent easing of the san francisco mask mandate is another step in the right direction that we believe will continue to encourage more infers and gatherings and collaborations.
and in austin , we 're very encouraged with the market and our early stage lease negotiations.
i will discuss third quarter financial results and provide you with updated earnings guidance for 2021.
additionally , we have a number of leases under documentation.
the technology and life science companies that make up so much of our portfolio continue to thrive.
for the 510,000 square feet in the stabilized portfolio that were signed , gaap rents were up on average 26 % and cash rents were up 14 %.
on a year over year basis , as a reminder , the sale of the exchange had an impact of approximately $ 0.13 of ffo per share.
a few facts according to recent reports about austin , there are 185 people moving to austin on average each day , and interest among companies wanting to move to austin and those that want to expand in austin is above pre-pandemic levels.
