this backdrop provides us opportunities to offer our advanced and affordable solutions across all domains.
free cash flow was $ 630 million supported shareholder returns in excess of $ 900 million , including repurchases of $ 700 million from our recently authorized $ 6 billion program , with a balance from dividends following our 20 % increase in march.
before handing over to chris , with the transition occurring as planned on june 29 , this quarter marks my 38th and final earnings call leading harris and l3 harris as ceo.
it 's been rewarding nearly 10 years with the hard work and dedication of our employees.
margins expanded a robust 140 basis points to 18.9 % , resulting in earnings per share of $ 3.18 , up 14 % and ahead of internal targets.
harris grew from a small , niche , defense company to a leading mission solutions defense prime post the acquisition of exelis and the merger with l3 with revenue today of over $ 18 billion.
i 'm especially proud of the people at l3 harris who work hard every single day to support our customers ' critical missions and deliver value to shareholders.
this should be the last quarter of tough compares due to the pandemic , which our team has managed incredibly well , and we anticipate more stability in the affected businesses ahead.
all areas where we showed great progress in the first quarter.
as you heard at our investor briefing last month , we 're excited about the potential for the company and the value creation opportunities in front of us.
in terms of the top line , our q1 results , coupled with the biden administration 's announcement that the defense budget will continue to grow in fy ' 22 , about 1.5 points versus fy ' 21 , reinforces our optimism for growth.
as you know , i 'll continue as exec chair of the board for another year , working closely with chris as he becomes ceo.
and i 'm excited and optimistic about what l3 harris can accomplish in its next phase under chris ' leadership.
organic revenue is up approximately 2 % with mid-single - digit growth in our core government businesses , partially offset by covid - related impacts of about three points from our commercial businesses , consistent with our expectations.
earlier today , we reported strong first quarter results , building on last year 's progress with solid execution across all financial metrics.
we are encouraged by the continued focus on national security and support for our military within the budget and believe l3 harris is well aligned with priorities that emphasize the return to peer competition and operations in increasingly contested environments.
