we 've often described 2021 as cheniere 's cash flow inflection point , and you can see progress on that early in the year in our first quarter financial results.
we do not intend to cover cqp 's results separately from those of cheniere energy , inc. the call agenda is shown on slide three.
jack will begin with operating and financial highlights , anatol will then provide an update on the lng market , and zach will review our financial results and guidance.
before covering our results and outlook , i want to spend a minute addressing winter storm uri and its impact on cheniere.
as part of our discussion of cheniere 's results , today 's call may also include selected financial information and results for cheniere energy partners lp , or cqp.
as we described back in february , we were impacted by the widespread power outages in texas , which resulted in our corpus christi facility being down for a few days.
i 'm extremely proud of our operating personnel at both sabine pass and corpus christi for rising to yet another weather challenge and working so diligently to manage our operations smoothly throughout the freeze event.
in addition , we may include references to certain non-gaap financial measures , such as consolidated adjusted ebitda and distributable cash flow.
now full year 2021 is looking even better for us than it did on our last call in february.
after delivering on our 2020 guidance , despite a myriad of challenges , we continued our momentum into the first quarter and are off to a fast start.
from hurricanes to fog to now historic freezes , the cheniere platform has withstood whatever mother nature throws our way and our focus on safe and reliable operations continues to benefit our customers , shareholders and other stakeholders.
i continue to believe in the long - term viability and sustainability of lng as an essential fuel source in the low - carbon future.
more importantly , the global lng market has recovered significantly for 2021 and beyond as demand has outstripped supply , resulting in higher prices even during the shoulder and summer months.
and actual results could differ materially from what is described in these statements.
we did recognize a financial benefit as a result of some optimization activity in the period leading up to the storm.
anatol feygin , executive vice president and chief commercial officer ; and zach davis , senior vice president and cfo.
