moving to sales , 2020 volume totaled $ 433 million of predominantly non-core assets at average gaap and cash - cap rates of 5.8 % and 5 % respectively.
in the fourth quarter , we generated adjusted company funds from operations of $ 0.19 per diluted common share to end the year at $ 0.76 per diluted common share , the high end of our guidance range.
following a robust quarter of $ 182 million of industrial purchases and $ 292 million of sales , our industrial exposure increased to 91 % of our gross real estate assets excluding held for sale assets.
portfolio operations have been very strong during the pandemic with fourth quarter cash base rent collections averaging 99.8 %.
2020 was an outstanding year for lexington and our fourth quarter results were excellent across all our business lines.
executive vice presidents lara johnson and james dudley will be available during the q&a portion of our call.
we recently announced a dividend increase of 2.4 % , supported by our positive results throughout the year , which equates to an annualized dividend of $ 0.43 per common share.
in our view , this is the best way to achieve higher returns without compromising on quality when it comes to building characteristics , markets and locations.
while we expect to be active in the purchase market , we intend to allocate more capital to development opportunities in 2021 relative to 2020.
our plan is to continue growing our dividend annually.
as we near completion of our portfolio transition , we will continue to focus on acquiring and developing primarily single - tenant class - a warehouse and distribution properties in our target markets.
our company has evolved considerably over the last five years and we have mostly transitioned out of the office sector into the industrial sector , an asset class that we believe , continues to have strong fundamentals and an expanding opportunity set.
we had an active year on the investment side , purchasing $ 612 million of primarily class a industrial assets and investing $ 60 million into development projects.
along the way , we disposed of 127 consolidated non-industrial assets for $ 2.5 billion and purchased 60 industrial assets for approximately the same amount.
lexington believes that these statements are based on reasonable assumptions.
these included selling a land position in one of our etna parcels to kohl 's department stores and executing a full - building lease on our rickenbacker project , these are two great outcomes for us and we 're excited about the opportunities in our development pipeline going forward , which brandan will discuss in more detail later in the call.
