we will offer a state - of - the - art e-commerce experience and a strong brick and mortar footprint to ensure we easily reach consumers wherever they prefer to shop.
we encourage you to review those risk factors as well as other key information detailed in our sec filings.
with that , i 'll now turn over the call to melinda whittington , la- z - boy 's president and chief executive officer.
the most significant risk factors that could affect our future results are described in our annual report on 10 - k -- on form 10 - k.
demand across all businesses also remained high and backlog remains at record levels.
although we believe these statements to be reasonable , our actual results could differ materially.
also , as expected , we experienced significant short term margin compression on the wholesale business , primarily due to higher raw material and freight costs , which have risen at unprecedented rates and speed over an extended period.
and we are continuing to invest to increase flexible capacities due the remainder of this fiscal year in order to work through our backlog.
written same - store sales for our company - owned retail segment increased 22 % versus the prior year period , and at a compounded annual growth rate of 16 % over the last two years.
we continue to have inefficiencies at the plant level , as we open additional upholstery capacity and hire , train and work to retain what is currently about one - third more workers versus pre-pandemic.
as we 've talked previously , we made the decision to not take action on the backlog with our first four rounds of price increases since the pandemic began.
at the same time , we are experiencing challenges in our wholesale business.
melinda will open and close the call , and bob will speak to segment performance and the financials midway through.
and also during the quarter , we continued to return value to shareholders with a dividend payment and $ 36 million of share repurchases , and we 've recently expanded our repurchase authorization.
and now that we have a sustainably profitable direct to consumer model with joybird , we 'll increase investment to expand consumer awareness and accelerate profitable growth.
second , on the practical side , our procurement team has significantly increased inventory for key component parts to minimize future supply disruptions and ensure a steady stream of furniture is manufactured and delivered.
