common stock at an average price of $ 9.12 per share.
the definitions and reconciliations of the non-gaap terms included in our remarks today are also included in our 10 - k as well as our financial results report and our quarterly operating supplements.
now , i 'll read our safe harbor disclosure statement.
for our call today , bill fallon and anthony mckiernan will provide some introductory comments and then a question - and - answer session will follow.
now , here is bill fallon.
and our hta exposure was about $ 600 million of gross par or $ 1 billion of total debt service.
remediating our puerto rico credits continues to be our main priority.
at this time , there is a restructuring support agreement for the prepa bonds that has been approved by the federal oversight management board in over 90 % of the prepa creditors.
we also posted updates to the listings of our insurance portfolios.
as a result of the restructuring and the extinguishment of our cofina exposure , along with claims payments that we have made on our other insured puerto rico exposure , our total insured debt service on puerto rico bonds has declined from $ 7.9 billion at year - end 2018 to $ 3.3 billion at the end of 2019.
the court hearing for the related 9019 motion is scheduled for june.
governor vazquez and the puerto rico legislature have stated publicly that they do not support the agreement.
these negative impacts were somewhat offset by higher gains on financial instruments at fair value due to the sales of uninsured prepa and new cofina bonds during the year , net mark - to - market gains on insured derivatives , and higher total vie gains related to the consolidated cofina trusts , higher estimated credit suisse rmbs recoveries and elevated realized losses for 2018 due to the deconsolidation and termination of second lien rmbs vies.
the company 's adjusted net loss , a non-gaap measure , was $ 95 million or negative $ 1.25 per share for the fourth quarter of 2019 , compared with adjusted net income of $ 106 million or $ 1.20 per share for the fourth quarter of 2018.
the go plan of adjustment does include some proposed payments to the credit , such as hta , that have callback rights against the commonwealth but we believe that the amount allocated for these rights understates what hta is entitled to.
we continue to believe that repurchasing our shares at attractive prices is an effective way to increase long - term value for our shareholders.
