now let me get to the results.
before i discuss the business performance , i would like to just quickly remind everyone of our company priorities.
we have been sharing with you our strategic transformation to a diversified healthcare services company centered around a set of four enterprise priorities.
we believe the execution against these priorities is critical to our ability to generate long - term sustainable growth , and we want to reiterate our focus and commitment to each one of them.
our first priority is our people , our teams and our culture.
through our diversified portfolio of assets and operations , we as a company touch and impact many aspects of health and the healthcare system , including patients.
recently , we were recognized as one of the best places to work for lgbtq equality , the ninth year in a row we 've received this honor.
today , we reported third quarter fiscal 2022 results , another quarter with double - digit adjusted operating profit growth in all four segments , reflecting strength in the fundamentals across our businesses.
we put a particular focus on hiring , developing and promoting what we call a best talent strategy at mckesson.
embedded in our daily operations is our purpose : advancing health outcomes for all and our mission of building an impact - driven organization.
part of our focus on culture is our continued improvement in diversity and inclusion.
our commitments to diversity and refreshment includes our board of directors.
in the past year , our employees came together and shared countless moments of impact , finding new ways to get involved and to contribute.
in 2021 alone , we completed more than 26,500 volunteer hours and supported nearly 1,500 charities.
we 're pleased to report a strong third quarter with total company revenues of $ 68.6 billion and an adjusted earnings per diluted share of $ 6.15 , ahead of our expectations.
brian will lead off , followed by britt , and then we will move to a question - and - answer session.
