i talked earlier this year about the investments we 've made in improving patient access , better scheduling and a drive for increased pace and efficiency.
payer mix remained favorable on a year - over - year basis for the second consecutive quarter and the rate of admission into our nicu did so as well.
as a result , our revenue for the quarter of $ 473 million was above our internal expectations , as was our adjusted ebitda of $ 66 million.
there are , of course , the risks that we face , most importantly , the recent rise in covid - 19 cases driven by the delta variant.
i 'll add that other key metrics that were particularly volatile through last winter continued to show stable improving trends coming into the summer.
but that said , our updated view for the full year includes our experience to date.
looking forward beyond 2021 and count for the same risks , there are a number of factors that give me increased confidence that we 'll see additional growth in adjusted ebitda in 2022 that will get us pass the $ 270 million run rate we achieved pre-covid.
on a same - unit basis , total volume was up 1.3 % versus the second quarter of 2019 with hospital - based services up by 10 basis points and office - based services up by 5.2 %.
we want to make sure that patients that need our care receive our care as soon as possible.
and please remember that we call this initiative patient access because it 's really just that.
i 'll expand on these in three areas.
i 'm very confident that this is just the beginning of a long - term payoff.
our reengineered and focused sales efforts are accelerating our pipeline of organic growth.
first , we 're building momentum in our core.
q2 is the first quarter where we can estimate the impact of these initiatives , and we think we 've just begun by adding roughly $ 2 million to the top line in the quarter.
while demand has recovered faster than we had anticipated earlier in the year , we are also helping to drive additional growth across our practices.
