in addition , we ended the current quarter in great financial shape , giving us the financial flexibility to continue to invest in our business and pay the industry - leading dividend.
following a steep decline , marked by slower traffic and increased cancellations at the outset of the pandemic , we began to see order activity return to pre-covid levels in may.
this momentum continued into june , with net orders eclipsing last year 's june totals by 53 %.
for the quarter , net orders were up 5 % , given the uncertainties and sales obstacles we faced at the end of the first quarter.
the combination of low interest rates , constrained existing home supply and a heightened interest in single - family home ownership has resulted in a very favorable environment for our industry.
the strong demand trends we experienced in the quarter were broad based , both from a buyer segment and a geographic standpoint.
it should also be noted that sec regulation g requires that certain information accompany the use of non-gaap financial measures.
the strongest part of the market continues to be at the more affordable price points , which has been a strategic focus of ours for some time now.
our build - to - order operating model is also limits the need to use price discounts or heavy incentives.
we 're seeing an increased number of millennials who are entering their prime home - buying years , and this trend has only been accelerated by the pandemic.
the benefits of this strategy for mdc are that it allows for higher - margin revenues from our home galleries , reduced volatility in our results and proves a competitive advantage relative to spec-focused builders.
these and other factors that could impact the company 's actual performance are set forth in the company 's second quarter 2020 form 10 - q , which is expected to be filed with the sec today.
we believe this is especially true for our core buyer demographic , who are looking not only for value but also a home that fits their needs.
[ operator instructions ] for information on how to access the replay , please visit our website at mdcholdings.com.
even with a heightened sense of urgency to own a home , many homebuyers continue to prefer the flexibility of personalization that comes in a home built with their preferred finishes and selections.
as previously mentioned , our gross margin from home sales improved by 70 basis points year - over - year to 20.2 %.
