for instance , customers are anxious to adapt digital technology that will help them improve efficiencies , as well as transition to more predictive solutions.
in the first quarter , we posted solid operating results with revenues better than forecasted and our asset - light business model has continued to generate positive cash flow for which we have become well - known.
as it became clear that we were entering a period of incredible uncertainty , we took immediate action to adjust to these new realities.
they are continuing to deliver outstanding services which is helping our clients best manage through these unprecedented times , all the while positioning mistras to emerge from this global pandemic stronger and better prepared to further our industry leadership.
the immediate focus was on things that we could control , with our goal being to preserve and protect our reputation and to reinforce our position as our customer 's preferred partner.
so we doubled down our efforts to provide our customers with the high quality of service in which they have come to rely upon from mistras.
they have remained focused on the safety and well - being of our associates , clients , and partners.
additionally , we have made adjustments to our variable headcount and broadly rationalize our assets to align with anticipated future levels of activity.
i and other members of the executive team along with nearly all salaried employees have taken pay cuts and our board has also forgone some of their compensation.
we found innovative new uses for our technology.
we have accelerated some of the structural changes to improve margins while deploying technology to further improve productivity.
we are taking these actions while maintaining our commitment to delivering superior services which help our customers increase their efficiency , reduce their costs , and improve their outcomes.
mistras digital to help customers lower their cost and this is currently getting a high level of interest.
first , let me say that i 'm extremely proud of how our team has responded to current conditions.
we believe this dedication to the needs of our clients not only enhances our franchise today but establishes a solid foundation on which to build upon the market ’s eventual recovery.
consequently , we continue to forge ahead in areas that offer the greatest returns.
