please remember that such statements are only predictions.
and with that , i 'll hand the call over to rick and david.
as we announced in january , i will retire at the end of this month and david mutryn will become the chief financial officer on december 1.
i am confident that david is the right person to succeed me as cfo to help guide maximus in the future.
management uses this information internally to analyze the results and believes that may be informative to investors in gauging the quality of our financial performance , identifying trends and providing meaningful period - to - period comparisons.
it has been a privilege to be the cfo for maximus and a great place to finish my career.
i am proud of all that we accomplished together as a team during my time here.
actual events and results may differ materially as a result of risks we face , including those discussed in item 1a of our most recent forms 10 - q and 10 - k.
fiscal year 2021 was the dynamic here with the covid pandemic creating both challenges and opportunities.
our recent esg report includes our updated esg materiality assessment and ongoing commitment to provide essential services to the most vulnerable citizens in the communities we serve.
while we have been diligently reporting our contributions to shareholders , we have not discussed in this forum , the substantial commitments to esg and our accomplishments in this area over the last five years.
we view our iss governance score of 2 as solid and we are quite pleased with our latest iss social score of 1 , both as of october 2021.
maximus accomplished significant milestones this year , including winning and operating over $ 1 billion of covid response work and closing two large and strategic acquisitions.
maximus is a unique company dedicated to delivering better than average returns to all stakeholders , while simultaneously aligned with core esg principles by making vital government services more accessible to millions of people.
our commitment to esg is a journey of continuous improvement.
if you look at our progression on the msci framework , we began with a b rating in 2016 and currently hold a bbb rating for 2021.
