this is before including the acquisition of veterans evaluation services or ves that we announced on april 21st , with an expected close date in our third fiscal quarter.
the company 's operating income margin was 11.8 % for the quarter.
our better - than - expected results were driven by the high level of covid response work revenue in the u.s. segments and employment services work in australia , which experienced higher - than - expected volumes of activities.
since our february 4th call , we have continued to win a substantial amount of new work as maximus plays an integral role helping government customers serve their citizens during the pandemic.
and with that , i 'll hand the call over to rick.
our revenue attributable to covid response activities , such as contact tracing , unemployment insurance , cares act communications and vaccine communications were $ 242 million for the second quarter and $ 402 million year - to - date.
the segment continues to be affected by the pause in eligibility redeterminations for medicaid and the timing of some core programs returning to pre-pandemic levels remains uncertain.
the performance on this contract has improved faster than we projected , resulting in higher second quarter revenue and profit for our outside the u.s. segment.
i will now take you through our segment results , starting with u.s. services.
actual events and results may differ materially as a result of risks we face , including those discussed in item 1a of our annual report on form 10 - k.
please remember that such statements are only predictions.
our full year expectations for the u.s. services segment remain unchanged with a 17 % to 18 % full year operating margin predicted.
we expect significant improvement to the financial contribution from these contracts in fiscal 2022.
these contracts range in length from one year to six years.
we will continue to search for and execute tuck - in transactions that are accretive , deliver good value and have a strong potential to drive future organic growth.
accordingly , we 'll use most of our free cash flow for the next several quarters to pay down debt.
