switching gears , the utility also had a good quarter though warmer than normal weather did have an impact on earnings.
during the quarter , we saw the benefits of the ongoing expansion of our ferc - regulated interstate pipeline systems including significant incremental revenues from our empire north project , which went into service last september.
in addition , last summer 's tioga county acquisition continues to exceed our expectations with gathering throughput and appalachian production up over 45 %.
increased [ technical issues ] to $ 4.05 per share , at the midpoint an increase of 35 % in the prior year.
across all our operations , we continue to successfully execute on our near - term growth plans.
our fm100 expansion and modernization project received its notice to proceed from ferc in late february and construction commenced in early march.
while national fuel 's expectations , beliefs and projections are made in good faith and are believed to have a reasonable basis , actual results may differ materially.
this timing will allow seneca to capture the premium winter pricing typically seen in the transco zone 6 market.
to maximize the value of this new capacity , seneca is operating two drilling rigs in pennsylvania with first production from its recent rig addition in our eastern development area scheduled to come online just ahead of the leidy south in - service date.
we finished the critical path tree clearing on schedule and construction is under way on both compressor stations.
this next leg of growth underpinned by the fm100 project positions us differently from our appalachian peers.
we expect to begin construction on the pipeline portion of the project later this month.
and along with transco 's companion leidy south project will provide seneca with another valuable long - term outlet for its appalachian production.
we may refer to these materials during today 's call.
once complete , this project will generate about $ 50 million of annual revenue for us.
with us on the call from national fuel gas company are dave bauer , president and chief executive officer ; karen camiolo , treasurer and principal financial officer ; and justin loweth , president of seneca resources.
