we ended the quarter with $ 1.53 billion in total debt , of which 91 % was unsecured.
we collected nearly 97 % of rents in the quarter and nearly 98 % in october.
in the third quarter and for the year to date , we reported affo per share growth of 1.5 % and 4.5 % respectively.
it should also be noted that we were tracking on the lower end of the range for the first nine months of 2020 in terms of our numbers , formerly known as guidance.
we think this is a testament to the stability of the triple - net lease strategy , the needs - driven nature of the properties we invest in , as well as the underlying strength of our operating partners.
depending on the timing and effectiveness of the vaccine , we expect the impact of the pandemic to be more uneven across our property types , as winter approaches.
bickford has applied for grants under phase 2 and 3 of the provider relief fund , which we expect that they will receive before year - end , which will also improve their financial position.
thus far , our entrance fee communities and skilled nursing properties , which together generate over 50 % of our revenue , have been quite resilient.
they have additional deferrals of $ 750,000 available for each of december and january , all of which if exercised will accrue interest at an 8 % rate with repayment expected over 12 months beginning in june 2021.
these measures will improve bickford financially and create a long - term solution , but we will continue to work with them closely over the coming months and take further measures if needed.
however , our freestanding assisted living memory care and independent living operators are experiencing greater challenges , as covid cases are spiking in many parts of the country , which is slowing the pace of move- ins while move - outs are accelerating in what is typically a seasonally weak period.
this includes deferring up to $ 3 million of november rent.
we hope that everyone is staying healthy and positive in these most interesting of times.
investors are urged to carefully review various disclosures made by nhi and its periodic reports filed with the securities and exchange commission , including the risk factors and other information disclosed in nhi 's form 10 - q for the quarter ended september 30 , 2020.
while we are hopeful that more federal assistance is on the way , we cannot solely rely on this to resolve all the issues.
as the pandemic unfolded , we expected that there would be deferrals as we head into 2021.
