investors are urged to carefully review various disclosures made by nhi and its periodic reports filed with the securities and exchange commission , including the risk factors and other information disclosed in nhi 's form 10 - q for the quarter ended march 31 , 2020.
never has this been truer than today.
as a tribute , we have published some of our favorite caregiver and resident photos on the cover of our supplemental.
i hope you 'll take a look.
reputations are made during a crisis and i see operators making good decisions and taking action based on the principles they value , selflessly caring for their residents , nurturing a company culture that appreciates employees , and providing leadership and comfort to the employees and families of their residents.
i believe that when history reflects back on our industry and its practices during this time , there will be operators that are hailed as heroes.
first and foremost , we are deeply grateful to all the front - line heroes that are tirelessly combating covid - 19 every day , despite the great risk to themselves and their families.
on the cost side of the equation , it should not surprise anyone that our operators are spending more , particularly for labor and ppe suppliers.
kevin will give details on that later.
that said , the challenges posed to our operators and our business by this pandemic are very real and it is difficult to say with any degree of accuracy , when we will return to a more normal operating environment.
this is obviously pressuring our operators ' margins and we are prepared to help them weather this storm , where and when necessary.
this is having a negative impact on occupancy.
as our operators have implemented their protocols and taken appropriate actions to prevent or limit the spread of the virus , the result has been a significant downturn in inquiries , tours and move-ins.
as of may 5th , we had 192 active resident cases in 37 buildings.
sec.gov or on nhi 's website at www.
to put that in some perspective , nhi has over 20,000 residents being cared for in all of our properties ; so , less than 1 %.
