we continue to expect to invest approximately $ 2 billion in renewable generation by 2023 to replace the retiring capacity at schahfer.
let 's turn now to slide 3 and take a closer look at our key takeaways.
we are updating our guidance for 2021 to target the top end of the range of a $ 1.32 to a $ 1.36 per share in non-gaap diluted net operating earnings or noeps.
as we begin to refine our outlook for longer - term growth , the preferred path from nipsco 's 2021 integrated resource plan identifies additional investment opportunities , while advancing the retirement of remaining coal - fired generation between 2026 and 2028 and it supports our plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 90 % by 2030.
net of the trackers being rolled into base rates , the filing requests an annual revenue increase of approximately $ 221 million.
columbia gas of ohio rate case continues to progress.
now let 's look at some nisource utilities highlights for the third quarter , starting with our gas operations on slide 9.
pending its decision next year from the public utilities commission of ohio , new rates would be effective in mid 2022.
the nipsco portion of this investment will be better understood following further evaluation of the proposals we solicited associated with the irp.
information concerning such risks and uncertainties is included in the md&a and risk factors sections of our periodic sec filings.
our regulatory execution progresses with a proposed order approving a settlement in pennsylvania , a settlement filed in kentucky and a proposed order in maryland.
in addition , we filed a gas rate case in indiana in september.
slides for today 's call are available on nisource.com.
as part of the execution of this plan , construction continues on the indiana crossroads i wind project , which is on track to become operational in the fourth quarter of this year.
the case is focused on infrastructure modernization and providing safe , reliable service , while remaining in compliance with state and federal safety requirements.
construction has also started on a pair of solar projects dunns bridge solar i is being constructed by a subsidiary of nextera energy resources under a build transfer agreement.
