additionally , the content of the conference call may contain time - sensitive information that is accurate only as of the date hereof.
of note , while last quarter , each of our credit leaders providing an in - depth look at their respective markets and portfolios to be efficient.
today , i 'd like to highlight a number of current corporate initiatives , provide an update on the market and discuss portfolio activity across our core businesses during the quarter , and finally , provide our outlook for the balance of the year , and then i 'll hand it off to serena to discuss the financials.
i 'll provide those updates today.
please note , today 's event is being recorded.
now , to begin with , i wanted to touch on a few strategic and corporate actions we 've taken as of late.
as a reminder , annaly routinely posts important information for investors on the company 's website at www.
following one of the most challenging and unforeseen operating environments and annaly 's history , we were pleased with our performance during the second quarter.
these initiatives are a testament to our focus on driving shareholder value ensuring that the firm as a whole , our structure , as well as our portfolio is positioned to continue outperforming as our second - quarter results demonstrate.
at quarter end , we closed our previously announced internalization transaction , which marks a significant step in the series of measures and only is implemented as an industry leader from a governance standpoint.
this underscores our belief that the stock is undervalued relative to our book value and affirms our support of the value of our stock through the various capital allocation tools we have on hand.
we delivered an economic return of nearly 15 % and achieved core earnings well in excess of our rightsized dividend.
as an internally managed reit , we look forward to demonstrating increased transparency and alignment with our shareholders , who will benefit from our ability to be more nimble in the way we do business in order to generate long - term value.
we also announced two leadership changes , steve campbell was appointed as chief operating officer , and glenn botek will retire from his role as senior advisor at the end of august , while remaining a director on our board.
as coo , steve will expand on the work he has been doing as head of business operations and work closely with the executive team to help oversee annaly 's overall operations and risk management functions.
we do not undertake and specifically disclaim any obligation to update or revise this information.
