additionally , the content of this conference call may contain time - sensitive information that is accurate only as of the date hereof.
today , i 'll provide an update on the broader market , our capital allocation trends , including credit activity , and our outlook.
and as sean noted , our other business heads are also present to provide additional context during q&a.
please also note this event is being recorded.
the primary themes , the dominated markets in the fourth quarter are largely consistent with our third - quarter narrative.
the fed 's monetary policy accommodation provided considerable support for risk assets and contained interest rate volatility.
as a reminder , annaly routinely posts important information for investors on the company 's website , www.
nonetheless , it remains prudent to hedge the tail risk of a spike in rates as we 'll discuss shortly.
we do think the shift to higher longer - term rates will be gradual.
this backdrop , coupled with active portfolio management , drove our strong performance to close out the year as we delivered an economic return of 5.1 % for the quarter , ensuring a positive return for our shareholders for 2020 which is particularly notable given the historic disruption we all faced in march.
thus , the fed is expected to continue purchasing assets at their current pace through 2021 while forward guidance will keep the front end anchored.
now to address how this landscape influences our positioning and capital allocation , monetary policy tailwinds maintain agency as the primary vehicle for reinvestment of portfolio runoff.
now turning to the macro environment.
witnesses a meaningful recovery in labor markets and higher inflation readings.
we do not undertake and specifically disclaim any obligation to update or revise this information.
we have seen a continuation of this rate move into 2021 largely due to the results of the january runoff election and democratic control of each branch of government , leading to greater prospects ' further stimulus.
