the real estate attributes of single - tenant retail properties are far superior to the attributes of other property types , and the universe of opportunities to acquire these properties remains vast.
highlights for national retail properties in 2020 include : increasing the common stock dividend for the 31st consecutive year , a feat matched by only two other reits and by less than 1 % of all u.s. public companies ; raising $ 700 million of well - priced debt capital early in the year , which put us in a strong liquidity position as the pandemic began to spread and enabled us to end 2020 with $ 267 million of cash in the bank and nothing drawn on our $ 900 million line of credit ; reaching collaborative rent deferral agreements during the early stages of the pandemic with a number of our relationship tenants , which solidified our relationships and set us up for future acquisition business ; collecting 95.7 % of our rents due for the fourth quarter and 89.7 % of our annual base rent for the year 2020 ; supporting our associates and our community with programs and activities to advance associate well - being , employee engagement and community involvement ; and lastly , enhancing our executive leadership team with the appointment of steve horn , a 17 - year veteran with the company , as our chief operating officer.
and although our long - term track record of consistent per-share growth was disrupted in 2020 due to the pandemic , we remain committed to our multiyear business plan.
a reminder that our tenants are typically large , well - capitalized , regional and national operators with the scale , financial wherewithal and management expertise to weather significant disruptions in the business environment.
in our opinion , this impressive statistic validates the high demand for our well - located real estate sites.
these collection numbers compare very favorably with other retail real estate companies and are similar to the reported rent collections by companies with a significantly higher percentage of investment - grade retail tenants.
additionally , the majority of our properties are located in suburban markets , largely in the southern half of the united states , which have been somewhat less impacted by the pandemic than urban city centers.
our high lease renewal rate also continued in 2020.
i could not be prouder of how this talented team worked tirelessly to create shareholder value and support each other during this past crazy year.
we 're pleased to see that many of our tenants ' businesses are bouncing back more quickly than we had initially anticipated.
that 's up $ 0.01 from the preceding third quarter 's $ 0.62.
we believe that as we continue to execute on these strategic drivers in the post - pandemic world , we will consistently deliver core ffo per share growth and outperform reit averages on a multiyear basis.
we also had an active fourth quarter of dispositions , selling 13 properties for $ 12 million.
kevin will review the details of our guidance in his remarks.
that level of commitment to culture and institutional knowledge is invaluable.
to be clear , these rent collection percentages are for the regular original rent owed for those respective periods , meaning that it does not include collections of previously deferred rent.
