we do not have these contractual pass - throughs in europe and the u.k . so our ability to pass on any increases through price becomes more important.
the increase in net income was somewhat offset by a $ 6.7 million increase in sg&a during the quarter , $ 4.6 million of which was related to the valuation of our stock - based comp awards , mainly due to an increase in our stock price , and $ 1.6 million of which was due to higher medical claims.
on an adjusted basis , net income increased to $ 9 million or $ 0.27 per diluted share during the first quarter of 2021 , compared to $ 1.2 million or $ 0.04 per diluted share during the first quarter of 2020.
the adjustments being made to earnings per share are for restructuring charges , certain executive severance charges , loss on the sale of plant , accelerated d&a , foreign currency transaction impacts and transaction and advisory fees.
the increase is largely due to operating leverage from higher volumes.
the increase was primarily the result of increased demand for our products across all product lines and operating segments.
we will also continue to be opportunistic with respect to repurchasing our stock.
we will remain focused on managing working capital and generating cash as the year progresses.
from a margin standpoint , this increase represents adjusted ebitda margin expansion of approximately 260 basis points.
our balance sheet is strong , our liquidity position is solid , and our leverage ratio of net debt to last 12 months adjusted ebitda is unchanged at 0.6 times as of january 31 , 2021.
based on our strong first - quarter results and ongoing conversations with our customers , we are raising our expectations for the year and now expect approximately 12 % sales growth in our north american fenestration segment , approximately 5 % sales growth in our north american cabinet components segment and approximately 22 % sales growth in our european fenestration segment.
moving on to cash flow and the balance sheet.
i 'll now discuss the financial results.
we 're now comfortable providing the following full - year 2021 guidance : net sales of $ 945 million to $ 965 million ; adjusted ebitda of $ 112 million to $ 122 million ; depreciation of approximately $ 33 million ; amortization of approximately $ 14 million ; sg&a of approximately $ 105 million.
and for the most part , we 've been very successful in doing just that.
another current headwind is the availability of labor.
