this body of work is the quintessential example of the expansive journalism the times can uniquely deliver.
[ technical issues ] on our path to scaling direct , paying subscriber relationships.
we now have more than eight million paid subscriptions across our digital and print products , a testament to the success of our strategy , the strength of the market for paid digital journalism and our unique opportunity to meet that demand.
that milestone follows the second quarter with strong revenue and profit growth , modest net subscription additions and progress on our -- advancing our underlying model.
given the impact of the covid - 19 pandemic had on our business in 2020 , we will also present certain comparisons of our operating results in 2021 to 2019 , which we believe , in many cases , provides useful context for our current year results.
total subscription revenue grew 16 % in the quarter , the largest year - on - year subscription revenue gain in more than a decade.
advertising revenues surged compared with the same period last year.
our actual results could differ materially due to a number of risks and uncertainties that are described in the company 's 2020 10 - k and subsequent sec filings.
pulitzer prizes were announced in june and the times was the only news organization to win more than one this year.
it was also another strong quarter for demonstrating the breadth , reach and impact of our journalism with unparalleled coverage of the devastating events in south florida , the political crisis in haiti and the still surging pandemic.
the combined strength in these two revenue streams more than offset cost growth , and as a result , we recorded $ 93 million in adjusted operating profit , a 78 % improvement compared to the same quarter in 2020.
pulitzer writer wesley morris won the pulitzer for commentary for his urgent and moving essays exploring the intersection of race and culture.
these statements are based on our current expectations and assumptions , which may change over time.
we added 142,000 net digital subscriptions with roughly half in news and the balance in cooking and games.
on the call today , we have meredith kopit levien , president and chief executive officer ; and roland caputo , executive vice president and chief financial officer.
these tests demonstrated that there is meaningful demand for the bundle and that those who choose it are better at retaining than those who subscribe to only one product.
