insulation ebit decreased by $ 10 million.
in the quarter , our recordable incident rate was 0.69 , a slight improvement compared with the second quarter of 2019.
i 'm pleased with this performance and that everyone has kept safety and caring for each other the forefront of everything we do.
over the past several months , our executive team and dedicated covid - 19 response team have worked with our global enterprise to ensure our operations remain safe and effective for our employees , their families and other key stakeholders.
we remain vigilant in our use of personal protective equipment , health screenings , robust cleaning procedures , restrictions on business travel and work - from - home options as we actively monitor local health conditions and update our operating protocols as risk levels change.
i will start with safety and our second quarter results.
i remain confident that by managing these four priorities well , we will continue to deliver strong performance for the remainder of this year and position the company well for 2021.
and fourth , ensuring a strong balance sheet with access to capital as needed.
through the strength of our market - leading businesses , innovative product and process technologies and unique enterprise capabilities , the company delivered financial results better than what we outlined during our last earnings call as we capitalize on a faster recovery in residential end markets , particularly in the u.s. , improved manufacturing leverage and strong cost controls.
third , rapidly adapting our businesses to near - term changes in market conditions , while remaining focused on positioning us for long - term success.
during this time of increased demand uncertainty , we have stayed closely connected with our customers and suppliers to understand and respond to shifting market conditions.
second , staying closely connected to our customers , our suppliers and our markets.
since the start of the pandemic , we 've been focused on four key areas to ensure the strength and continuity of our business.
the tables in today 's news release and the form 10 - q include more detailed financial information.
while our financial position at the beginning of the quarter was strong , in may , we took advantage of favorable capital markets and successfully completed a 10 - year $ 300 million bond issuance.
this , along with our working capital management and opex and capex controls , led to an increase in our available liquidity to approximately $ 1.5 billion , including almost $ 600 million in cash.
