in april of 2021 , we closed on a new four - year $ 1.45 billion unsecured credit facility and a $ 50 million unsecured term loan that both mature in april of 2025.
our fourth quarter adjusted ffo is $ 0.77 per share and funds available for distribution are $ 0.72 per share.
turning to skilled nursing facility industry trends.
in addition , certain operator coverage and financial information that we discuss is based on data provided by our operators that has not been independently verified by omega.
in general , these efforts include one or more of the following actions : one , rent deferrals ; two , asset sales or transitions to a new operator ; and three , in certain cases , rent resets with other amended lease provisions.
dan will provide detail regarding specific operator , current liquidity and restructuring issues.
omega snf occupancy has been virtually flat for the three months ended december 31 , and the preliminary january occupancy is slightly down.
turning to operator liquidity issues and restructuring.
examples include elimination of purchase options , future upward potential rent resets , lease extensions or revisions of renewal rights and collateral enhancements adjustments or usage.
one interesting item is that in december , 21 % of our facilities are at or above pre-covid occupancy levels , which may indicate that full occupancy recovery is achievable over time.
although the impact of omicron appears to be rapid and transitory , it is impossible to predict how quickly the industry occupancy recovery will regain traction or how rapidly the current labor force pressures will subside.
reconciliations of these non-gaap measures to the most comparable measure under generally accepted accounting principles , as well as an explanation of the usefulness of the non-gaap measures are available under the financial information section of our website at www.
unfortunately , the already difficult labor shortage grew increasingly worse as staff became infected and were forced to quarantine.
during the call today , we will refer to some non-gaap financial measures , such as nareit ffo , adjusted ffo , fad and ebitda.
these staffing shortages have limited many facilities ability to admit new residents , which has had the knock - on effect of backing patients up in the hospital systems.
we continue to remain hopeful that the outcome of our covered restructurings will yield a similar result.
