as of september 30 , the amount available to be drawn under the revolving credit facility totaled $ 61 million , which together with cash on hand resulted in available liquidity of $ 129 million , compared to $ 113 million at june 30.
we were on track through august for sequentially stronger results given the ongoing improvement in oil and gas industry fundamentals.
however , our results in the operations were negatively impacted by hurricane ida , following its landfall on august 30th , along the louisiana gulf coast.
our personnel remained safe through this devastating storm and our facilities did not sustain major damage.
during the third quarter of 2021 the company generated revenues of $ 141 million and adjusted consolidated ebitda of $ 8.5 million.
however , with power not fully restored until late september , results of operations within our offshore / manufactured products and well site services segments were affected by temporary facility closures and local workforce challenges.
any such remarks should be weighed in the context of the many factors that affect our business , including those risks disclosed in our form 10 - k , along with other sec filings.
we have also incurred delays in the production and shipment of goods to our customers and services in the gulf of mexico were suspended for approximately one month.
so as a company , we are very proud to have been recognized for our esg efforts and practices.
reported results have not been adjusted for the estimated impacts of hurricane ida.
in september , oil states was recognized by the energy workforce & technology council , formerly known as pesa , with the esg accelerator award for significant advances in esg reporting , score improvement , and industry leadership.
however , on a consolidated basis , we estimate that hurricane ida resulted in our third quarter revenue and ebitda shortfalls of approximately $ 6 million and $ 3 million , respectively , offsetting the benefit of increased u.s. land based completion activity.
expanding economic activity and increasing backlog level support a stronger outlook going into 2022.
to the extent that our remarks today contain information other than historical information , please note that we are relying on the cafe harbor protection afforded by federal law.
fortunately , these hurricane - related delays are considered transitory and should be recovered in future quarters.
at september 30th , our net debt totaled $ 111 million yielding a net debt to total net capitalization ratio of 14 %.
