with yesterday 's earnings announcement , we updated our 2021 financial guidance expectations.
i 'm also looking forward to reacquainting or meeting many of you in the near future.
oneok has seen tremendous growth and success under terry 's leadership the last seven years as he 's navigated the company through several growth cycles and industry challenges , including delivering strong results during a pandemic.
terry championed many companies ' successes , the transition to higher fee - based business model with less commodity price exposure , significant improvements in companywide safety and environmental performance , the successful oneok partners merger transaction and the completion of more than $ 10 billion in capital growth projects to name just a few of his many accomplishments.
during this first month on the job , i 've been refamiliarizing myself with our business , holding strategy and planning meetings with the team and most importantly , listening.
i 'm excited and honored to be back.
the energy and economic backdrop continue to improve with producer activity accelerating and demand for ngls and natural gas strengthening.
yesterday , we reported a strong second - quarter financial result , supported by increasing volumes across our system.
i 've met with my leadership team and many employees to hear more about their focus areas.
we will continue to focus on meeting our customers ' needs while also transforming these energy systems to drive the overall lowering of greenhouse gas emissions.
kevin will talk more in detail about how we 're addressing those needs.
these introductions and conversations are very important and will continue.
the energy systems today were designed to operate on the consumers ' requirements for affordability , reliability and , resiliency.
for 32 of my almost 40 - year career , i had the good fortune to work with the assets and the people through various companies that are now a part of oneok.
what you can expect from me as a ceo is that we will be disciplined and intentional in all that we do and continue to encourage a culture that promotes safety , reliability , employee engagement , value creation and environmental responsibility.
we appreciate your interest and investment in our company.
