and lastly , we optimized the operational process to continue to improve our controllable service metrics.
this effort and focus has reinforced our position in the healthcare industry as a trusted partner by delivering on our mission of empowering our customers to advance healthcare.
in addition , i am extremely pleased to be here today and report another strong quarter and close out of a record year.
the strong performance in the quarter as well as the full year was a result of the successful execution and implementation of the key initiatives discussed during the previous quarterly earnings calls , which included two major items : one , infrastructure investments , with a focus on current and long - term profitable growth ; and two , operational improvements , with a focus on enhancing the customer experience and increasing operating efficiencies.
today , i 'm joined by ed pesicka , our president and chief executive officer ; and andy long , our executive vice president and chief financial officer.
starting with our global products segment , let me remind you of the infrastructure investments and operational improvements we shared previously during the past year.
at a high level , we expanded our manufacturing output to align with the volume commitments of our customers.
two , we improved our inventory planning processes and algorithms.
additionally , in our discussion today , we will reference certain non-gaap financial measures.
three , we enhanced our data management service offering through qsight and the launching of myom.
and then they 're delivered through our network of distribution centers , with our teammates and our technologies.
we manufacture a full range of healthcare ppe categories and subcategories , primarily manufactured in the americas.
the company has explained some of these risks and uncertainties in its sec filings included in the risk factors section of its annual report under form 10 - k and quarterly reports on form 10 - q.
and we expect this momentum to continue into 2021.
i 'd also like to call your attention to supplemental slides related to our 2021 outlook posted on our website in the investor relations section.
and i 'm immensely proud of our accomplishments and the dedication of the owens & minor teammates.
