in total , the consolidated claim ratio benefited by 1.8 percentage points for both this year 's second quarter and first half , compared to 0.3 and 0.6 percentage points for the same period a year ago.
again , comparing to the second quarter of ' 20 , general insurance saw growth return with net written premium increasing by 13 % and in title insurance we grew net premiums and fees earned by 57 %.
so our specialty strategy with our diverse portfolio of specialty products in both the general insurance and title insurance groups continue to deliver strong growth and strong profitability.
so with that introduction , i 'll now turn the discussion over to frank , to discuss some of the per share figures along with our investment portfolio , and then he 'll turn things back to me to cover general insurance , and that 'll be followed by carolyn , who will discuss title insurance , and then of course , we 'll open it up to q&a after that.
so frank , i hand it over to you.
so i 'll kick things off here.
net investment income decreased slightly for the quarter and almost 5 % year - to - date , as the impact of lower yield on new investment purchases more than offset a modest increase in the average investment base.
for the first six months of this year net operating income was $ 427 million , which was up 61 %.
at june 30th , that investment portfolio consisted of approximately 68 % of highly rated bonds and short - term investments with the remaining 32 % allocated to large - cap stocks that have a long history of not only paying dividends , but increasing them.
the average maturity on the bond portfolio remained consistent at approximately four years , and the book yield was 2.6 % compared to a market yield of 2.5 %.
this growth was driven by a combination of our strong earnings along with further market appreciation within the investment portfolio.
risks associated with these statements can be found in the company 's latest sec filings.
so taking into account dividends , this was an 11 % increase from last year - end.
additionally , shareholders ' equity rose to just under $ 6.8 billion , resulting in book value per share growing to a record $ 22.59.
both of the documents are available at old republic 's website , which is www.
the last year showed the increased usage of our digital solutions and platforms , we saw a similar trend with the usage of our digital closing platform pavaso.
