finally , while our wholesale business only comprises about 20 % of our total sales , it remains an important channel of distribution.
to deliver superior customer experience in today 's market , we need to stay focused on our long - term north star objective of continuing to improve our customer centric , digitally driven , seamless , cross channel shopping experience , with an emphasis on mobile.
the boundaries between our retail and e-commerce businesses are becoming increasingly blurry.
our excellent results are attributable to the strength of our brand portfolio and how we communicate our aspirational upbeat brand messages through beautiful inventory , differentiated products and exceptional customer experiences.
we recognize that an ever - growing number of customer journeys to purchase , include both physical and digital elements.
most consumers no longer distinguish between the relationship with the digital aspect of the brand and their physical relationship with our brands , they simply think of their relationship with our brands.
growth in our direct - to - consumer channel was led by our highly profitable e-commerce business , which grew by 49 % over the second quarter of 2019.
they want and expect to be able to mix and match digital and physical elements at will.
our team 's relentless focus on improving our customer experience is evident in our numbers , which exceeded 2019 levels.
in addition to the impressive top line growth , we were able to simultaneously expand our e-commerce gross margin.
we are determined to fulfill this desire and continue to invest in the people , processes and technology , that will allow us to do so.
the better we are at providing a truly seamless omnichannel experience , the better our customers ' overall experience will be , which will ultimately result in increased brand loyalty , and a stronger business over the long term.
we have talked many times about our ability to ship from store , as an example of the blending of these two channels.
due to the material impact of covid - 19 on our business in fiscal 2020 , we will also include comparisons to our fiscal 2019 results.
for the year , we expect our total e-commerce business to be roughly a third of consolidated sales , compared to 23 % in fiscal 2019.
in addition , we are thrilled to have signed our first lease for a company - owned store for the beaufort bonnet company , and look forward to opening later this year.
