residential mortgage originations have spiked as rates hit historical lows and neighborhoods experience an upsurge in activity with more individuals working from home and assimilating to the new work environment , which we see as continuing well into the future.
on a positive yet related note , we had expenses for the planned acquisition of sb one of $ 683,000 during the quarter and look to complete the closing tomorrow.
we remain comfortable with our capital structure and balance sheet strength.
our capital ratios continue to be strong , given our business mix and risk management processes.
second quarter earnings were impacted by covid and cecl as the provision for loan losses and expenditures related to providing a safe environment for our customers , employees took priority as we phased our staff - back - to - office process and afforded our customers full branch access.
in view of our capital and pre-tax pre-provision earnings expectations , the board approved a $ 0.23 cash dividend.
net income for the quarter was $ 14.3 million or $ 0.22 per share.
as we begin the summary of our second quarter , it is our sincere hope that you and yours are safe and healthy.
the loan pipeline remains robust at $ 1.3 billion , and activity continues to provide us with growth potential as payoffs have added during covid.
the impact on our net interest margin from the short end of the curve is now largely behind us , but historically low long - term rates will continue to put pressure on asset yields as our loan and investment portfolio is repriced at lower coupons.
and of the ppp loans , we are assuming that approximately 75 % to 80 % will be forgiven once the government provides the vehicle and forms to complete this.
we are also placing interest rate floors on most of our commercial loans.
the impact of ppp loans on our margin was two basis points.
the decrease in earning asset yields of 45 basis points linked quarter reflects falling benchmark interest rates on adjustable rate loans , accompanied by modest growth in new originations at lower rates and the $ 403 million in ppp loans.
today 's presenters are chris martin , chairman , president and ceo ; and tom lyons , senior executive vice president and chief financial officer.
borrowing costs also improved to 1.31 % from 1.80 % in the trailing quarter.
