regarding full year estimates of certain key items for the upcoming year , we expect total capital expenditures to be between $ 500 million to $ 525 million , which excludes any potential capital spending related to the jackson conversion since that is still being evaluated , as mark indicated earlier.
fourth quarter net sales were $ 1.7 billion in both 2020 and 2019.
excluding the special items , fourth quarter 2020 net income was $ 127 million or $ 1.33 per share compared to the fourth quarter of 2019 's net income of $ 163 million or $ 1.71 per share.
i 'll then wrap things up and we'd be glad to take questions.
for the full year 2020 , packaging segment ebitda excluding special items was $ 1.2 billion with sales of $ 5.9 billion or 21 % margin compared to full year 2019 ebitda of $ 1.3 billion with sales of $ 5.9 billion or 22 % margin.
looking at the packaging business.
demand in our packaging segment remained very strong as sales volumes in both the containerboard mills and the corrugated products plants set all - time records.
i 'm mark kowlzan , chairman and ceo of packaging corporation of america.
high demand for trucks due to low inventories along with driver shortages and rail rate increases drove higher freight expenses of $ 0.07 and our tax rate was $ 0.05 per share higher primarily due to some of the benefits we had in 2019 that were not repeated in 2020.
although we were able to replenish some inventory during the quarter by postponing a large discretionary outage at the deridder mill and utilizing the jackson mill for additional containerboard production , we again ended the period with inventory levels lower than planned and at a new low from a weeks of supply standpoint due to much stronger - than - expected demand.
free cash flow was $ 612 million.
we 'll then be able to discuss this further with you.
we had capital spending of $ 421 million.
as expected , late in the quarter , we began to see the initial benefit of our recently announced packaging segment price increases.
in order for us to address our strategic integrated containerboard supply needs capable of providing the necessary runway to grow our downstream box plant demand , this analysis along with other options we 've been evaluating will be reviewed by the board of directors in our february meeting.
while we do n't comment on forward pricing specifics , we would expect to realize the vast majority of the increases during the first quarter of 2021.
