similar to the number 3 machine at jackson , the smaller number 1 machine is highly efficient.
total company ebitda for the third quarter excluding the special items was $ 464 million in 2021 and $ 323 million in 2020.
third quarter net income included special items expenses of $ 0.06 per share primarily for certain costs at the jackson alabama mill for paper to containerboard conversion related activities while last year 's third quarter net income included special items expenses of $ 0.11 per share that were related primarily to the impact of hurricane laura on the deridder , louisiana mill.
the items were partially offset by operating costs , which were $ 0.84 per share higher , primarily due to inflation - related increases , particularly in the areas of labor and benefits expenses , recycled fiber costs , energy , repairs , materials and supplies , as well as several other indirect and fixed cost areas.
packaging segment demand remained strong and the teams did a tremendous job of implementing their previously announced containerboard and corrugated products price increases.
after that , i 'll then wrap things up and then would be glad to take questions.
looking at the packaging business.
and sales volume in our paper segment was lower by $ 0.02 per share.
we manage very effectively , the execution of numerous initiatives and capital projects to reduce cost through efficiency , productivity , and optimization improvements across our manufacturing locations.
we continue to put tremendous effort into managing certain material , equipment , and labor availability issues to keep our customers supplied and their needs and their capital projects on track.
under the terms of the agreement , pca will acquire a modern full line 500,000 square foot corrugated products facility located in grand rapids , michigan.
the transaction is structured as a purchase of assets , resulting in a full step - up of the assets to fair market value.
this was required to help meet continued strong demand from our box plant customers , meet our targeted inventory levels prior to year - end , and help supply the needs of our box plant acquisition that we anticipate acquiring later this quarter.
this will also allow us to evaluate our strategic containerboard supply capabilities for providing the necessary runway to grow our integrated downstream box demand.
we are committed to being fully integrated and we have a track record of ramping up our internal capacity according to our customers ' demand requirements.
we 'll also use the period to further refine our estimates and assumptions to fully understand the potential of the entire mill to produce containerboard on both machines at their optimal cost and quality.
