as we look ahead , we see additional opportunities for private label securitizations and subsequent investments for pmt , bolstered by recent gse fee increases on certain loans as mandated by the fhfa.
book value per share decreased to $ 19.05 from $ 19.79 at the end of the prior quarter.
our high quality loan production continues to organically generate assets for pmt and this quarter , $ 17.2 billion in upb of conventional correspondent production led to the creation of $ 239 million in new , low - coupon mortgage servicing rights.
we continue to create new credit investments in the form of subordinate bonds from non-agency investor loan securitizations , also sourced from pmt 's production volumes.
pmt paid a common dividend of $ 0.47 per share.
during the quarter , we repurchased 2.2 million common shares of pmt common stock for $ 39 million.
this performance can be attributed to pmt 's organic business model led by the deep and talented management at pfsi , with years of experience successfully navigating changing mortgage markets and the associated risks.
the origination market is projected to decline substantially in 2022.
pmt went public in july of 2009 and in our more than 12 - year history we have delivered shareholder returns that have exceeded comparable reit indices.
organic asset creation remains a competitive advantage for pmt relative to other mortgage reits.
inside mortgage finance estimates the 2021 origination market was $ 4.8 trillion and current forecasts for 2022 total $ 3.1 trillion , a reduction of 35 % year over year.
these impacts were partially offset by strong returns in our credit sensitive strategies , which consist of investments in gse credit risk transfers and investments in non-agency subordinate bonds.
for the fourth quarter 2021 , pmt reported a net loss attributable to common shareholders of $ 27.3 million or $ 0.28 per common share , driven primarily by fair value declines in its interest rate sensitive strategies.
the smaller origination market , combined with significant levels of competition for conventional loans in the correspondent channel , including from the gses , is expected to result in headwinds for pmt 's correspondent production business in the near - term.
combined with the platform and management team provided by pfsi , we believe pmt is uniquely positioned to capitalize on opportunities as they arise and evolve.
an example of this is our recent success aggregating and securitizing investor loans while investing in the subordinate tranches of the resulting bonds.
