this achievement included overcoming a $ 0.12 per share unfavorable impact from covid , due primarily to low sales volumes in the u.k. and lower commercial and industrial demand in kentucky , as well as a $ 0.05 per share unfavorable impact due to mild weather compared to normal conditions.
i 'll then share some closing thoughts on our key focus areas for 2021.
i 'm incredibly proud of how ppl performed in 2020 , a year unlike any we 've seen in our lifetimes.
it was a year that tested our resolve , our resilience and our ability to adapt very quickly to dynamic conditions.
later , joe will provide a more detailed overview of year - end and fourth - quarter financial results.
importantly , we provided electricity and natural gas safely and reliably to more than 10.5 million customers when it mattered the most.
this included the hospital workers and the first responders who were on the front lines.
i 'll also share a few updates on regulatory and esg matters.
shifting to our financial performance.
with that in mind , we continued to offer payment assistance programs , flexible payment options and referral services to help customers manage their energy bills.
and it included customers whose homes became offices , whose kitchens and bedrooms became classrooms and who were counting on us to deliver without fail.
as we focused on our commitment to provide a superior customer experience , we also recognized the need to support our local communities and assist customers struggling with covid - 19.
we 're extremely honored that our continued operational excellence resulted in further recognition from these very same customers in 2020.
we also received the u.k.'s customer service excellence award for the 28th time since 1992.
this included topping all large utilities in the east for the ninth straight year for residential customer satisfaction and all mid-sized utilities in the midwest for both residential and business customer satisfaction.
with me as usual are joe bergstein , our chief financial officer ; greg dudkin , the head of our pennsylvania utility business ; paul thompson , the head of our kentucky utility business ; and phil swift , who heads up our u.k. utility business.
