joining our call today are our chief executive officer , glenn williams ; and our chief financial officer , alison rand.
as a reaction to the pandemic phase , we are helping guide clients ' investment decisions and assisting families as they prepare for a more financially secure future.
these last 18 months are a perfect example of the balance and resilience of our business model.
i 'm proud how quickly our sales force is adapted to a combination of virtual and in - person client interactions to continue serving middle - income families when they need us most.
since the emergence of covid - 19 , primerica has been educating and assisting clients in choosing the right protection products to meet their family 's insurance needs.
over the same 18 months , we 've delivered on our strategic goal of expanding our product offerings.
we moved from pilot to full rollout of the new mortgage business , which continues to grow as we gain experience.
these results include an adjusted net operating loss of $ 4.6 million or $ 0.12 per diluted adjusted operating earnings per share for our newly acquired interest in e-telequote.
our strong results continue to reflect our ability to adapt to the changing business environment.
we also launched our senior health referral program during the third quarter , further rounding out a balanced product platform to help clients through every financial step of their life journey.
we also expect to surpass $ 900 billion of face amount in force by the end of the year , another milestone in our corporate history.
roae at 24.1 % during the quarter remained strong.
and while sales are down versus the record levels , we forecast full year sales to be about 10 % above pre-pandemic levels.
at $ 8.7 billion , total sales during the first 9 months of 2021 have already eclipsed full year 2020 levels , and we 're on pace to break $ 10 billion in annual sales for the first time in our history.
we will also reference certain non-gaap measures , which we believe will provide additional insight in the company 's operations.
as anticipated , sales in our term life segment have started to normalize versus their covid peak.
