we expect subscription margins to remain relatively constant in the fourth quarter of 2021.
before i hand the call over , i 'd like to remind our investors and analysts about our upcoming virtual investor fireside chat , taking place on november 17th from 1:30 pm to 3:00 pm central time during the 2021 pros outperform conference.
we ended the quarter with significant outperformance on our guidance ranges for profitability and cash flow , and delivered revenue results in line with our expected ranges.
we did see impact from the delta variant in our q3 results and our q4 outlook.
as a reminder , during the call we will discuss non-gaap metrics.
stefan will expand on this later.
our strategy is to accelerate market adoption of the pros platform , deliver an incredible experience and drive significant value for our customers.
historically , this market segment did n't have access to the best - of - breed , ai - powered revenue management solutions.
this means that results could change at any time , and the contemplated impact of covid - 19 on the company 's business results and outlook is the best estimate , based on the information available as of today.
this demonstrates the pent - up demand for travel , both leisure and business , and energizes us for the pace of recovery heading into 2022 , as more borders open.
for example , when the announcement was made that the europe to u.s. travel ban would be lifted in november , carriers saw an immediate 140 % increase in ticket sales in a single week for european travelers.
we continue to drive incredible value for customers , evident by our expanding partnerships and best - in - class gross revenue retention rates.
in travel , we 're starting to see international restrictions ease , and some carriers are seeing significant increases in passenger demand as a result.
we received industry recognition of our leadership in both cpq and price optimization and management.
when i look at all of this and the progress of the recovery , i could n't be more excited for what is to come.
we also continue to make steady progress on our services margins and were within $ 200,000 of breakeven in the third quarter.
