our strong balance sheet underpinned by improved oil price outlook supports both the acceleration and increase of our inaugural variable dividend.
after payment of the base dividend as our balance sheet continues to strengthen due to higher strip pricing as a result of improved oil demand and a successful vaccine.
in addition , we had two highly accretive transactions that also led us to making this decision and accelerating.
obviously , we 're very excited after talking about it for 18 months to announce that we are both accelerating our first variable dividend payment into the third quarter this year as well as increasing the payment to reflect 75 % of second quarter free cash flow.
the initiation of our variable dividend payments marks a significant milestone in our investment framework as shareholders will begin receiving material cash return through eight dividend checks per year.
this is all accomplished while maintaining our focus on safe operations and environmental stewardship in the field.
horizontal lease operating expense dropped by nearly $ 0.25 per boe when compared to the first quarter.
lastly , pioneer is the largest producer in the permian , with the largest inventory of tier one locations , over 15,000 , and the lowest breakeven price in the lower 48.
pioneer 's execution remains strong as total production and oil production were in the upper half of our guidance ranges as we successfully integrated doublepoint 's operations into our program.
we go on to slide five.
both recent acquisitions were highly accretive and added significant tier one inventory.
apollo , who was the largest shareholder from doublepoint , our largest shareholder from doublepoint has sold out from 13 million shares to about two million shares and now less than 1 % of the outstanding of the company.
we will also present our continued strong execution , underpinning our low reinvestment rate and best - in - class breakeven oil price.
today , we will be discussing pioneer 's strong second quarter results and our enhanced return of capital strategy.
we were not looking at any more midland basin large acquisitions.
we bought the best two available.
