and we are optimistic about the fourth quarter in spite of the traditional holiday - related slowdown at this time of the year.
during the third quarter of 2021 , oilfield drilling and completion increased as exploration and production companies responded to higher commodity prices.
please review these disclosures if you 're interested in seeing how they are calculated.
rpc was ready to meet increased demand with equipment and crews.
in addition , rpc is required to use ebitda to report compliance with financial confidence under our credit facility.
our revenues increased and rpc generated quarterly net income for the first time in more than two years.
we 're using these non-gaap measures today because they allow us to compare performance consistently over various periods without regard to nonrecurring items.
as the quarter progressed , commodity prices continued to increase and near - term industry forecasts predicted supply / demand dynamics favorable to our industry.
offsets to these favorable dynamics include supply chain constraints and increasing cost pressures , which we will continue to manage as we move forward in this industry up cycle.
before we begin our call today , i want to remind you that in order to talk about our company , we 're going to mention a few things that are not historical facts.
our cfo , ben palmer , will discuss this and other financial results in more detail , after which i will provide some closing comments.
cost of revenues increased primarily due to expense -- increases in expenses consistent with higher activity levels , such as materials and supplies expense , maintenance and repairs costs and fuel costs.
our calendars are filling up.
we currently estimate full year 2021 capital expenditures , excluding lease financed equipment , to be approximately $ 65 million , comprised primarily of capitalized maintenance for existing equipment and selected growth opportunities.
this was due to activity increases in all of our service lines as well as slight net pricing improvement in several of our larger service lines.
during the quarter , rpc recorded a cares act tax credit that was largely offset by the resolution of a long - term contractual dispute defender.
