this type of control is not available to multi-tenant owners that sell pads to unaffiliated entities.
we continue to benefit from the multiyear mark - to - market opportunity and strong demand at our centers.
we recently closed on our new net lease platform and are now under contract on our first property in the boston market that we expect to allocate between rpt 's balance sheet and the new platform.
we believe we now have the capital and the platforms to generate strong external growth as well as the portfolio quality and leasing demand to drive above - trend internal growth as we move past the pandemic.
our rent collections continue to tick higher.
while the pandemic has created many hardships , it has also created opportunities that we have been able to capitalize on.
for instance , covid - 19 has had a negative impact on many tenant categories.
we are happy to have kicked off the new year in strong fashion.
our joint ventures also add a new , sustainable and diversified cash flow stream to rpt and we believe will improve our ffo growth profile by enhancing our returns and increasing the economic spread on our deployed capital as we take advantage of the valuation dislocations i mentioned earlier.
i hope you and your families are all well.
ironically , many of the big - box tenants that were not in favor pre pandemic have thrived sense , enough so that we think credit center is a more apt description for the power center category.
listeners to any replay should understand that the passage of time by itself will diminish the quality of the statements made.
as we 've previously noted , the $ 151 million initial seed sale to rgmz will close in tranches over the course of 2021.
three other projects were also added this quarter , bringing the total in - progress pipeline to over $ 13 million with expected returns in the high single digits.
the first tranche of 13 parcels closed on march five for just over $ 36 million.
we have made very good progress since last quarter with the grocery deal at troy marketplace moving from the shadow pipeline to the active pipeline.
