let me start by addressing where we are strategically , how we 're viewing the future of the hard seltzer category , and how we plan to grow our portfolio going forward , even without high - double - digit hard seltzer category growth.
i will now pass it over to jim for some introductory comments.
our intent today is to provide some additional context around our third quarter earnings , discuss our views on trends , we see driving results at boston beer and in our industry and talk about how we see performance going forward.
before we discuss our business , i 'll start with our disclaimer.
frank will then provide details of the third quarter financial results and how these results have been impacted by slower than anticipated hard seltzer growth , as well as our outlook for the remainder of 2021 and 2022.
then i will share with you our longer term view of the business.
joining the call from boston beer are jim koch , founder and chairman ; dave burwick , our ceo ; and frank smalla , our cfo.
based on our growth projections , we moved aggressively to build inventory to try to avoid the out of stocks that we experienced in 2019 and in 2020 and to secure capacity both short term and long term to be ready for growth through 2023.
but despite these ongoing strengths , we experienced very large unanticipated costs as the result anticipated costs as the result of the sudden unexpected slowing of growth in hard seltzer.
i 'll begin with some context.
dave will share our perspective on the decisions that led to these unanticipated costs , and frank will share a fuller accounting of them.
in measured off - premise channels year - to - date through october 10 , where our brand portfolio represents only 4.4 of the total industry volume , we 've delivered more than 41 % of the total industry volume growth , the highest by far of all brewers.
our success had been recognized by our most important customers , our distributors , who recently voted us the top beer supplier in 2021 in the latest tamarron survey.
we have a broad portfolio of healthy brands which we will further build in 2022 to continue driving our growth.
this is mike andrews , associate general counsel and corporate secretary of the boston beer company.
as we look toward 2022 and beyond , our aim is to continue double digit depletions growth on the foundation of this portfolio , especially as consumers drink more beyond beer products.
