our specialty product business results were up due to order timing and improved margins within our mct product line.
the company had a good first half and delivered record results.
adjusted net income was $ 84.6 million or $ 3.62 per diluted share.
although , demand for cleaning , disinfection and personal wash products has slowed from the pandemic peak , we had stepan remain committed to doing our part by supporting customers that supply these essential products to the market.
through a combination of process optimization and additional manufacturing equipment , stepan will be prepared to supply customers ether sulfates that meet the new regulatory requirements.
surfactant operating income was down 5 % , largely due to higher north american supply chain cost , driven by inflationary pressures and planned higher maintenance cost.
this project is the primary driver of our 2021 capital expenditure forecast of $ 150 million to $ 170 million and will carry over to 2022 as well.
the best way to protect yourself and your family is to be vaccinated.
let 's just start with the slide four to recap the quarter.
luis will walk you through a few more details about our second quarter results.
stepan has increased its dividend for 53 consecutive years.
as discussed previously , we are increasing north american capability and capacity to produce low 1,4 - dioxane sulfates , a minor byproduct generated in the manufacture of ether sulfate surfactants , which are key cleaning and foaming ingredients used in consumer product formulations.
we are working with our customers to ensure these projects deliver our financial return targets.
the polymer growth was driven by both the invista polyester polyol acquisition and organic market growth.
our board of directors declared a quarterly cash dividend on stepan 's common stock of $ 0.305 per share payable on september 15 , 2021.
overall , the integration of invista 's business into our company has gone well and is on track with our business plans.
