for the occupational health centers , patient visits were down 30.7 % to 2.15 million visits in the quarter.
as i mentioned on our last earnings call , the effect of the pandemic began to impact our company in mid-march.
i also mentioned we thought april would represent the low point for our business , and we would begin to see a rebound in the areas of our business hardest hit by these disruptions.
in our critical illness recovery hospitals , we have held steady during the second quarter on census and our occupancy in light of some of the challenges covid presents , while our cost of care has increased , we have seen increased occupancy and revenues every month throughout the pandemic.
and these unusual times it is gratifying to see such a dedicated group of clinicians and support staff come together throughout our organization to provide the highest quality care while keeping our patients and staff safe.
volume and revenue shortfalls in june compared to prior year were 19.7 % and 17.8 % respectively which was a significant improvement from april and may and we experienced positive adjusted ebitda in june.
in june however we saw meaningful improvement as states began to ease restrictions in hospitals and surgery centers began performing elective surgeries again.
having said that , we saw a significant rebound in this business segment in june , as revenue increased over 24 % for the month on the same period year - over - year basis.
first , let me say how proud i am of the operational leadership and clinical excellence i have seen throughout organizations these last several months.
before outlining some of our operational metrics i want to provide you with some summary comments regarding the effects of covid - 19 pandemic on our operations.
in our outpatient rehabilitation and concentra segments , volumes continue to be our biggest challenge.
our june occupancy rate is -- of 78 % is close to pre-covid levels and exceeded june 's last year occupancy of 73 %.
adjusted ebitda and margin growth were driven by our revenue growth which was partially offset by higher operating expenses related to covid.
our rehabilitation hospitals segment adjusted ebitda was $ 27.6 million , compared to 30 million in the same quarter last year.
net revenue declines were most significant during april which was down 45.6 % year over year and may which was down 43.3 % year over year.
