as such , we are having a record year in fixed income brokerage , as the first three quarters are not only up 70 % from 2019 , but already surpassed our previous full year record in 2016 by 5 %.
i 'll then come back with my concluding thoughts.
the covid pandemic has impacted millions of people worldwide and resulted in ever - changing challenges for both our healthcare system and our economy.
despite this backdrop , it 's the focus of my partners and associates at stifel that has enabled us to provide the high - quality financial advice that our clients have come to rely on over the past 20 - plus years as we 've grown into a premier wealth management and middle market investment bank.
i 'm going to start the call by running through the highlights of our third quarter , before turning it over to jim , who will take you through our balance sheet and expenses.
with that , let 's look at our results.
simply , we had another great quarter.
capital raising revenue achieved a quarterly record , trading volumes are up year - over - year and credit quality remains strong at stifel bank.
i 'm joined on the call today by co-presidents , jim zemlyak and victor nesi ; as well as our cfo , jim marischen.
for the first nine months of the year , we achieved record revenue and earnings per share.
additionally , wealth advisor recruiting accelerated , which built on the momentum we achieved during the first six months.
this more than offset the expected pullback in advisory revenue and net interest.
i want to highlight the strength of our business for both the quarter and year - to - date.
and may not be duplicated , reproduced or rebroadcast without the consent of stifel financial.
our pipeline remains strong and despite the uncertainty of the u.s. economy resulting from the pandemic , stifel remains well positioned for continued growth.
equity brokerage revenue of $ 54 million was up 32 % year - on - year as activity levels slowed from the record levels in the second quarter as market volatility slowed.
