our operating expense ratio was 17.9 % and , excluding credit provision and investment banking gross-ups , totaled 16.9 % , which was within the guidance range we gave on last quarter 's call.
then jim marischen will review our balance sheet and expenses , and i 'll wrap up with some concluding thoughts.
our third quarter represented our second - highest net revenue and earnings per share , as both operating segments , global wealth and institutional , generated strong results.
as i 've said before , our success is driven by the continued reinvestment in our business.
i 'll start the call with some highlights from our quarter and first nine months.
and based on our investment banking and recruiting pipelines , organic bank growth and expertise in acquisitions , stifel remains well positioned to continue and build upon our decades - long growth.
, and may not be duplicated , reproduced or rebroadcast without the consent of stifel financial.
revenue in the quarter totaled nearly $ 1.15 billion , an increase of 30 %.
turning to the next slide.
while certainly pleased with our quarterly revenue , it is noteworthy that we achieved this despite the fact that several large advisory assignments which we had forecast to close in the third quarter have slipped into the fourth quarter.
as we forecasted , compensation as a percentage of net revenue declined sequentially to 58.2 %.
tangible book value per share also increased 27 % in the last year.
for the nine - month period , we generated record revenue of more than $ 3.4 billion , up 28 % over the comparable period in 2020.
in addition , reflecting our focus on returns to investor capital , we earned nearly 28 % annualized return on tangible common equity.
the strength of our results were driven by a combination of revenue growth and expense discipline , resulting in pre-tax margins of nearly 24 %.
i 'm joined on the call today by our chairman and ceo , ron kruszewski ; our co-presidents , victor nesi and jim zemlyak ; and our cfo , jim marischen.
