similar to our 2 staten island for cells that were brought online in 2020 , this fuel cell , which will be our third catamaran is eligible under new york 's vder program , which fixes 75 % of revenue and is supported by o&m agreement that guarantees 95 % availability.
mike will conclude by offering some closing remarks.
i am pleased to report that sji , notwithstanding the continuing challenges of covid , again delivered solid performance in the third quarter and through the first nine months of 2021 , and we remain on - track to achieve our strategic and financial goals for the year.
consistent with our strategy , our utilities , south jersey gas and elizabethtown gas represent the bulk of our earnings.
utility margin growth remained strong , reflecting above - average customer growth , positive rate case outcomes , infrastructure modernization programs and effective o&m management.
reconciliations of economic earnings to the comparable gaap measures appear in both documents.
as you know , the bpu has called utilities in new jersey to evaluate preparedness for potential gas supply interruptions.
natural gas remains in strong demand across new jersey with our utilities adding more than 12,000 new customers over the last 12 months.
preliminary engineering and design of the project has commenced.
and while we are seeing increased new construction across the state , most of our growth continues to come from customers converting from heating oil and propane.
throughout today 's call , we 'll be making references to future expectations , plans and opportunities for sji.
i 'm joined today by mike renna , our president and chief executive officer ; steve cocchi , our chief financial officer ; as well as additional members of our senior management team.
our other segment contributed a loss in economic earnings of $ 9.6 million compared to a loss of $ 9.2 million last year , reflecting higher interest and bank fees partially offset by lower outstanding debt.
this next phase of system modernization targets coated steel and vintage aldyl - a plastic pipe , supporting the murphy administration 's safety and reliability , job creation and environmental goals.
sji will receive 92 % of the investment tax credits , cash flows and net income from this project.
as previously communicated , we believe this legislation will encourage innovation and accelerate new jersey 's decarbonization efforts.
