given this run rate , we 're comfortable with our outlook for future collections.
[ operator instructions ] on the call today will be steven tanger , our executive chair ; stephen yalof , chief executive officer ; and jim williams , executive vice president and chief financial officer.
we are encouraged by a greater macro outlook over the past 90 days as vaccination rollout continues and an improving retail environment , as evidenced by the consumer confidence index in late april , reaching its highest level since the onset of the pandemic.
the improvement we are starting to see in some of our operating metrics reflects the excellent value proposition that our open - air centers provide for both retailers and shoppers.
as such , it is important to note that management 's comments include time - sensitive information that may only be accurate as of today 's date , may 6 , 2021.
we are confident that , by continuing to make progress executing on our strategy , we 'll position the company to return to sustained growth over time.
during the call , we will also discuss non-gaap financial measures as defined by sec regulation g , including funds from operations , or ffo ; core ffo , same - center net operating income , and adjusted ebitda.
however , in the near term , we anticipate that we will continue to see pressure on retenanting spreads this year as we fill recaptured space that was at rental rates above the portfolio average.
however , this reflects a 300 basis - point improvement on a cash basis , a 390 basis - point improvement on a straight - line basis compared to our reported q4 2020 spreads.
collections of contractual fixed rents billed in the first quarter of 2021 were approximately 95 %.
we are focused on rebuilding our occupancy , driving leasing , and curating our merchandise mix to maximize shopper frequency and dwell time , and to bring new customers to tanger centers.
consolidated portfolio occupancy was 91.7 % at the end of the quarter , up only 20 basis points from the end of 2020.
we direct you to our filings with the securities and exchange commission for a detailed discussion of these risks and uncertainties.
this reflects the anticipated 61,000 square feet of space recaptured during the quarter related to bankruptcies and brandwide restructurings.
this information is available on our investor relations website , investors.
one thing the covid environment reinforced is the importance of meeting the customer where they are and creating a more personalized experience.
