in summary , we are pleased that we have delivered strong first quarter results.
we delivered a solid first quarter , operationally and financially.
sales of $ 283.7 million increased 9.4 % over the first quarter of 2019 and were driven by higher sales volume in north america.
sales volumes increased primarily due to milder weather conditions in our key markets compared to a year ago which was an unusually cold and wet winter.
i 'd like to first begin with a high level summary of our first quarter financial performance and we 'll then turn to a more detailed discussion on the coronavirus pandemic , the impact it has had on our business and the actions we are taking to address this unprecedented situation.
sales were partially offset by weaker conditions in europe , which was impacted by the covid - 19 beginning in mid-march.
our gross profit margin was strong at 45.7 % , an improvement of 320 basis points year - over - year.
i 'm pleased to discuss our results with you today.
however , two of our larger european operation in the united kingdom and france were ordered to cease nearly all operations in late march , forcing us to temporarily furlough many of those affected employees.
as of today , all of our us manufacturing facilities remain operational in accordance with the applicable shelter - in - place orders as suppliers of businesses deemed essential , including hardware stores and other building material companies.
this was largely due to sales mix and decreased material costs.
we have every intention of being able to bring those employees back to work , when the timing is right.
the health and safety and well - being of our employees , their families , our customers and our communities is our top priority , and is at the forefront of every decision we make.
now i would like to turn the conference over to karen colonias , simpson 's president and chief executive officer.
some of these factors and cautionary statements are discussed in the company 's public filings and reports , which are available on the sec or the company 's corporate website.
in terms of our 2020 plan , while the operating environment has made it difficult to predict , with these financial targets remain achievable by the end of the fiscal 2020 , we continue to execute based on the same underlying principle of focusing on operating efficiencies and cost savings to guide us through this pandemic as we move forward.
