for memorial day weekend rv revenue was up 39 % compared to 2019.
the change is being driven by continued outperformance of transient rv , marinas , the sustained strength in our manufactured housing portfolio and our robust acquisition activity , particularly as we begin to realize the meaningful marina industry consolidation opportunity.
complementing our operational performance was sun's well received inaugural unsecured bond issuance , following our investment grade rating from s&p and moody's.
we issued $ 600 million of senior notes in an oversubscribed offering in mid june.
this outperformance , along with a positive outlook for the third and fourth quarters once again led us to raise our core 2021 ffo guidance range by $ 0.31 at the midpoint to $ 6.25 to $ 6.37 per share.
sun ' access to the bond market provides us with enhanced financial flexibility to most efficiently match fund our investment activities.
comparing to a non-covid impact quarter our second quarter ffo per share was 53 % greater than the second quarter of 2019.
with a healthy pipeline of internal and external growth opportunities we believe this was the right time for the step and we 'll look to continue enhancing our credit metrics over time for improved ratings.
our acquisition teams remain extremely active sourcing deals and channeling them through our underwriting process.
this brings year - to - date acquisition volume to over $ 853 million across 28 properties.
for the quarter , same community noi grew 21.6 % over last year , reflecting the continued demand in each of our segments and our favorable strategic positioning to capture that demand.
we are very enthusiastic about the opportunities we are seeing across each of sun 's businesses.
as of quarter end we had approximately 9,400 sites available for development that we anticipate delivering over time.
we are pleased with the continued outstanding performance of all our business segments.
our excellent reputation as a transaction partner and our structuring flexibility gives us access to off - market transactions across manufactured housing communities , rv resorts and marinas.
looking at the most recent holiday weekends further illustrates how demand has escalated.
