this subscription transformation to solarwinds ' observability will become a mainstay beginning in 2022.
during this virtual event , we described our portfolio and go - to - market plans for solarwinds , our expanding market opportunity , which we believe will amount to approximately $ 60 billion by 2025 ; and our goal to achieve at least $ 1 billion in arr by 2025 , with a compounded annual subscription arr growth north of 30 % over that time period ; and then building to ebitda margins in the mid-40s.
we believe this combination of top line scale , growth and strong profitability will put us in a small group of public software companies with a similar financial profile.
as i mentioned earlier , we had several highlights in the fourth quarter of 2021.
as many of you are also aware , we held our annual analyst day meeting on november 10 , 2021.
we anticipate both our license and subscription revenues to grow in 2022 , reflecting a recovery in sales to new and existing customers and further expanding our recurring revenue base.
for the full year , we delivered $ 719 million of gaap revenues , representing flat year - over - year performance relative to 2020 ; and adjusted ebitda of $ 303 million , representing a 42 % ebitda margin while growing subscription revenue 19 % year over year on a gaap basis.
it 's now a little over a year since i joined solarwinds.
our trailing 12 - month q4 maintenance renewal rate of 88 % was above the low - to mid-80 % renewal rates we noted -- we expected in 2021.
customer retention remained our top priority throughout 2021 , and we made great progress toward this goal in q4.
i hope you 're doing well and staying safe.
that execution led to another quarter of better - than - expected financial results with total revenue ending at $ 186.7 million , well above the high end of our total revenue outlook of $ 180 million to $ 184 million.
while we believe the stand - alone motion will continue to accelerate , our service desk solutions will become integral elements of the solarwinds platform to support our automation and remediation capabilities.
our aiops capabilities are being delivered on the same platform , further bolstering our customers ' productivity by helping them to manage their deployments more simply to isolate issues efficiently and to remediate them quickly.
moving to our subscription revenue.
we continue to take our commitment to building a safer and more secure customer environment very seriously.
