notably , the firm sales agreements and fixed basis differentials will expand the company 's margins and dampen its overall basis volatility.
his strategic perspective and disciplined approach really complement our existing strategy and our management team.
i look forward to working with both of these talented leaders as we continue to execute our strategy to enhance sustainable value for our shareholders.
southwestern energy 's returns driven strategy focuses on creating sustainable value protecting financial strength , consistently delivering leading operational and financial results and pursuing opportunities to capture the benefits of increasing scale.
we appreciate you joining us today and i hope that you 're all safe and well.
at the core of our strategy and value proposition is a commitment to the right people doing the right things.
our success depends on the alignment and commitment of a fully engaged diverse and inclusive workforce nurtured by our high performing innovative and value - driven culture.
we may also refer to some non-gaap financial measures , which help facilitate comparisons across periods and with peers.
indigo furthers our sustainable value creation strategy by expanding our overall opportunity set and moderating risks to our business.
because of indigo's low - cost structure and strong balance sheet , we expect to see immediate accretion to key financial metrics , including improvement in corporate returns and increase in free cash flow and the accelerated delivery of our deleveraging goal later this year.
these locations are adjacent to premium gas markets including lng and other growing demand centers.
the highlight of the quarter was the announced acquisition of indigo natural resources.
this transaction expands the scope and scale of our company by combining core positions across the country 's two premier natural gas basins and accelerates the delivery of key financial and strategic objectives.
the integration planning process is going well and ahead of schedule.
although , we believe the expectations expressed are based on reasonable assumptions , they are not guarantees of future performance and actual results on developments may differ materially , and we are under no obligation to update them.
our quarterly reports and our definitive proxy statements for the special meeting regarding the indigo transactions all are filed with the securities and exchange commission.
