the decrease was primarily associated with the economic impact of covid - 19 on several end markets , including the food service equipment and hospitality industries at the pumps and merchandising businesses and the dump markets at hydraulics.
consolidated revenue increased 8.5 % sequentially.
this is ahead of the outlook we provided previously of fiscal first quarter 2021 revenue being flat to slightly above the fourth quarter of 2020.
at the electronics segment , revenue increased 23 % sequentially and 18.6 % year - on - year , reflecting positive trends in magnetics as well as contribution from the recent renco acquisition.
sequentially , engraving operating margin increased 800 basis points to 16.1 % due to cost efficiency and productivity initiatives on 15.1 % revenue growth compared to fiscal fourth quarter 2020.
finally , the scientific segment reported its highest quarterly sales ever at $ 16.7 million.
finally , i will conclude with comments on our outlook and key takeaways.
we also began to implement tax savings initiatives in the quarter , including optimizing our foreign tax credits.
we are on track to deliver over $ 7 million in savings in fiscal 2021 from the actions we announced in the third quarter of fiscal 2020.
earlier this year , we divested our refrigerated solutions business and established scientific as a stand - alone reporting segment , both actions advancing our strategy to build our higher - margin segments.
we are leveraging these top line trends with stronger operating disciplines in all businesses , complemented by several financial initiatives.
in engraving , we see continued opportunity in the tool finishing and soft trim tool laneways globally.
ademir will follow with a discussion of our consolidated results and financial position.
in addition , our electronics new business opportunity pipeline is healthy at $ 56 million across a wide variety of end markets.
we expect the sales contribution from this pipeline to grow sequentially on an annual basis.
i will then review our segment performance.
