the picture highlighted on slide 5 shows the tesla model y version.
consolidated organic revenue growth of approximately 17 % year - on - year reflected strength at our electronics and scientific segment.
our results also reinforce the benefit of our continued investment in end - markets that had healthy growth prospects and where we can incorporate our innovative solutions and strong customer value proposition.
we continue to have a favorable outlook for fiscal 2022 , and look forward to further successfully executing on our growth strategy.
in addition , our reed switch production and material substitution project at the electronics segment continues to mitigate some of the material inflation we are seeing , and remains on - track to be substantially complete by the end of fiscal 2020.
we are driving manufacturing and supply chain productivity with actions including new lean programs and mitigating inflationary trends through price realization and value engineering.
ademir will discuss our financial performance in greater detail later in the call.
execution on our active form of productivity and efficiency initiatives is further adding to our success.
standex is a stronger company today as a result of well - executed portfolio moves and a higher level of performance of our businesses.
i 'm very pleased with our first quarter results which reflected solid financial performance and an expanding pipeline of growth opportunities.
at the scientific segment ; we are also introducing a new product family , blood bank refrigerators and plasma freezers leveraging our expertise in life sciences and refrigeration to expand into adjacent markets.
in the second quarter , we expect revenue and operating margin to increase slightly compared to fiscal first quarter 2022 and significantly compared to the year ago quarter.
turning to the engineering technologies segment on slide 7.
looking ahead , we have a very active new business opportunity funnel for approximately $ 61 million , which is expected to deliver first year sales of $ 19 million with positive trends across all major geographic areas and business units , and are well positioned to further capture additional customer business.
the new version of this product has several attractive features including modern styling with a very viewable and accessible product area.
the picture on slide 4 highlights the success of our customer intimacy sales model in moving up the value stack in a customer 's product.
