the second quarter 2019 results do not include any divestiture - related costs.
we urge you to read sensient 's filings , including our 10 - k , our first quarter 10 - q , and our forthcoming second quarter 10 - q for a description of additional factors that could potentially impact our financial results.
please bear these factors in mind when you analyze our comments today.
now , we 'll hear from paul manning [ phonetic ].
our actual results may differ materially , particularly in view of the uncertainties created by the covid - 19 pandemic , governmental attempts at remedial action and the timing of a return of more normal economic activity.
i 'm very pleased with the results of our flavors & fragrances group as well as our food & beverage business in the color group.
last year 's second quarter results include $ 36.4 million of revenue and an immaterial amount of operating income from the operations to be divested.
we believe we can close this transaction by the end of the year.
these non-gaap financial results should not be considered in isolation from or as a substitute for financial information calculated in accordance with gaap.
we also had favorable growth in our natural colors and pharmaceutical businesses , which were up in the quarter.
these items , which are included in the divestiture and other related costs , increased net earnings by $ 1 million or approximately $ 0.02 per share.
we anticipate closing the yogurt fruit prep sale in the third quarter.
all of our production facilities are open and have been throughout the pandemic.
the growth in these businesses was offset by the adverse impact of coivd - 19 in the personal care market and throughout latin america , europe and asia - pacific.
i 'm also pleased on the progress we had made during the quarter on our divestitures.
during our call today , we will reference certain non-gaap financial measures which we believe provide investors with additional information to evaluate the company 's performance and improve the comparability of results between reporting periods.
