now let me take you through our quarterly results and provide an update on our outlook.
let me start by stating the obvious , the first quarter was not the quarter we expected to have , that reality was driven by 3 events , cyber security incident that caused the global system outage , a freak winter storm in texas , that forced utility companies to shutoff power to major businesses , including our fort worth brewery and government pandemic restrictions that shut down the entire on - premise channel in the uk and severely restricted much of the on-premise in canada.
to say that all of these events happened in a single quarter is unprecedented , would be an understatement.
so while we can't control the weather , across the business , we executed well on what was in our control.
so with that , over to you gavin.
that 's true , how we responded to each event.
our team quickly implemented contingency plans to boost production and get our core brands back to a stable inventory before memorial day.
so let 's look deeper in each area.
and we continued working to protect the environment through significant initiatives in the united kingdom.
and also , unless otherwise indicated , all financial results the company discusses are versus the comparable prior year period and in u.s. dollars.
as expected , the availability of our 12 - ounce standard cans returned to normal levels.
let 's start with our coor.
but most importantly , it 's true of how we are executing on our revitalization plan.
our truss joint venture 's non-alcoholic cannabis beverages are holding strong as the number 1 dollar share spots in the entire canadian cannabis beverage market.
20.53 net sales per hectoliter on a brand volume basis increased 1.8 % in constant currency as the net pricing growth more than offset the negative mix effects in canada and europe.
our u.s. above premium portfolio grew brand volumes versus the prior year and continue to gain industry share according to irr , and we took substantial steps toward our hard seltzer ambition.
