the company would also like to advise you that during the course of the call , we will be referring to ebitda , specifically ebitda as defined , adjusted net income and adjusted earnings per share , all of which are non-gaap financial measures.
to summarize here are some of the reasons why we believe this.
about 90 % of our net sales are generated by proprietary products and over three quarters of our net sales come from products , which we believe we are the sole source provider.
most of our ebitda comes from aftermarket revenues , which generally have significantly higher margins and over any extended period have typically provided relative stability in the downturns.
to reiterate , we are unique in the industry in both the consistency of our strategy in good and bad times , as well as our steady focus on intrinsic shareholder value creation through all phases of the aerospace cycle.
we follow a consistent long - term strategy.
he served in a range of roles over his years with transdigm , including as president of several operating units , executive vice president , coo of transdigm 's airframe business group and most recently , vice chairman , where he oversaw the integration of the operating units acquired as part of the esterline transaction.
specifically , we own and operate proprietary aerospace businesses with significant aftermarket content.
our q1 fiscal results show positive growth in comparison to the same period in fiscal 2021 as we are lapping the first quarter of 2021 , which was heavily impacted by the pandemic and prior to the widespread availability of vaccines.
we continue to see recovery in the commercial aerospace market and are encouraged by the trends in air traffic among other factors.
we utilize a simple , well - proven , value - based operating methodology.
bob has been a key member of the transdigm management team for over 25 years and a significant partner in the company 's growth during the entire period.
we have a decentralized organization structure and a unique compensation system , closely aligned with shareholders.
our long - standing goal is to give our shareholders private equity - like returns with the liquidity of a public market.
and finally , our capital structure and allocation are a key part of our value creation methodology.
he retired at the end of first fiscal quarter.
