i will first discuss some additional financials for the quarter not covered by robert and al , and then i will discuss our second quarter and full year 2021 outlook.
operating margin increased 426 basis points and free cash flow nearly doubled.
in addition , i 'm very pleased with the breadth of our financial performance across teledyne.
year - over - year sales increased in nearly every major business category except commercial aerospace , which is now only 4 % of our total sales.
excluding these non-recurring charges , earnings increased 39.2 % compared to last year.
the recovery in our short cycle commercial business is unfolding nicely and our government businesses are also growing and performing well , in both cases , strongest within our digital imaging segment.
furthermore , we achieved these gaap results despite incurring $ 39 million or $ 0.79 per share of expenses related to the pending acquisition of flir.
also in the first quarter , we received all time record orders with a book to bill of 1.15 x resulting in quarter - end backlog of approximately $ 1.8 billion.
al will now comment on the performance of our four business segments.
we remain confident of immediate pre-tax annual synergies greater than $ 40 million having continue to expect , earnings per share accretion even on a gaap basis in 2022 with earnings per share accretion , excluding amortization being substantially greater.
we began 2021 with the best first quarter sales , earnings , operating margin and cash flow in the company 's history.
and now with respect to the fair acquisition over the last few months while transaction certainty progressively increased , teledyne performed in - person visits covering 90 % of all flir on - site several on multiple occasion.
i am now even more excited about the prospect for flir as part of the teledyne family.
this is jason vanwees , executive vice president.
most importantly , we were also granted access to the operating management in all key functional areas.
to summarize , flir 's people , products , technology and manufacturing are outstanding.
