as we look forward , we expect our strong performance to continue into our fourth quarter.
in addition to the recovery , it 's also important to note that we 've strategically focused te around select secular trends and these trends are accelerating in the key markets that we serve.
you 'll see this in our transportation segment with electric vehicle adoption accelerating in our communications segment around cloud investment and in our industrial segment with capital spending accelerating globally around factory automation as well as digitization.
while we have a recovery that is happening faster and is more robust than we all thought , the reality is that the world is dealing with supply chains trying to catch up to this faster recovery.
in this backdrop , we are performing well in this environment and our strong results for the quarter and our performance so far this year demonstrates the strength and diversity of our portfolio.
we are generating sales , adjusted operating margins and adjusted earnings per share that are above pre-covid levels and we remain excited about the additional growth and margin opportunities that we 'll be on this year.
first , i am pleased with our execution in the third quarter and the quarterly records that we achieved.
we are willing to take follow - up questions but ask that you rejoin the queue if you have a second question.
due to the large number of participants on the q&a portion of today 's call , we 're asking everyone to limit themselves to one question to make sure we can give everyone an opportunity to ask questions during the allotted time.
starting with transportation , our sales were up approximately 70 % organically year - over - year with growth in each of our businesses.
in europe , our orders were down 7 % sequentially and in north america , our orders were essentially flat versus last quarter.
consumer demand for autos remains robust , but ongoing challenges with semiconductor supply continue to impact our customers ' ability to produce.
when you look at orders in the quarter , they remained strong at $ 4.5 billion consistent with the levels we had in the second quarter.
we expect sales to be up in the high teens over the year to approximately $ 3.8 billion.
in communications , you see the growth opportunities in the cloud and the ongoing increase in capital expenditure trends by the cloud providers.
the trends around our content growth remain strong in the transportation segment.
