the revenue decline was the result of lower sales of laryngeal masks , regional anesthesia and airway management products.
overall , considering the environment we are operating in , we are pleased with our third quarter performance as it reflected the expected improvement in trends across many of our global product categories , led by a faster - than - expected recovery within our interventional urology business , and continued strength within our vascular access product sales.
while from a regional perspective , we saw particular strength within the americas as the pace of recovery in the united states during the third quarter was encouraging.
quarter three revenues was $ 628.3 million , which was down 4.1 % as compared to the prior year period on a constant currency basis but far better than the 12 % decline we experienced during the second quarter of the year.
it 's a pleasure to speak with you today , and i hope you 're all keeping safe and well.
the decline in year - over - year revenue is due to the impact of covid - 19 , which we estimate caused a net negative impact of approximately $ 78 million , or approximately 12 %.
management is providing this commentary to provide the investment community with additional insights concerning trends , and these disclosures may not occur in subsequent quarters.
with our adjusted earnings per share of $ 2.77 in the quarter meaningfully exceeded our internal expectations.
you 'll also hear management make statements regarding intra-quarter business performance during the month of october.
this reflects the continued recovery we saw as we moved through the quarter , coupled with prudent operating expense management.
due to growth within both our picc and ez - io products , third quarter revenue increased 6.8 % to $ 160 million.
however , there were offsets with declines in other product categories.
and finally , our other category , which consists of our respiratory and urology care products , grew 0.5 % , totaling $ 86 million.
in addition , interventional urology was a strong contributor as urolift continues to be one of the fastest recovering procedures.
however , it was partially offset by our cost containment efforts as we continue to tighten our belts where we deem appropriate in the current environment , balanced against continued investment to sustain our long - term growth aspirations.
let 's now move to a discussion of our revenue by global product category.
