teekay lng has reached an important milestone with the completion of its growth program , with the delivery of its fifth and sixth 50 % arc7 lng carrier newbuilding for the yamal lng project , which immediately commenced their respective 26 - year charter contracts , as well as its 30 % owned bahrain regas terminal completed mechanical construction and commissioning , and began receiving revenues in early january.
our fourth quarter consolidated results were positively impacted by significantly stronger spot tanker rates at teekay tankers , the start - up of various growth projects and higher charter rates secured on certain lng carriers at teekay lng , improved results from our directly owned fpso units and lower g&a expenses across the group.
in addition , we narrowed our consolidated adjusted net loss in the fiscal year 2019 to $ 19 million from $ 53 million in 2018 and we continue to expect 2020 to be a profitable year.
we also generated total adjusted ebitda of $ 324 million , an increase of $ 113 million or 53 % from the same period in the prior year , excluding the contribution from teekay offshore which we sold in may of 2019.
overall , we are expecting another strong q1 -- a strong quarter in q1.
on the balance sheet side , in january 2020 , teekay parent eliminated $ 52 million of debt guarantees previously provided to teekay tankers as a result of their $ 533 million refinancing completed during that month and we fully repaid the remaining balance on our 2020 unsecured bond with cash.
however , the crude spot tanker market has come under pressure in recent weeks on the back of the coronavirus and the us lifting sanctions on cosco with the former leading to a downgrade in oil demand by the iea.
looking ahead , we believe the medium - term fundamentals remain intact with a record year in 2019 for new lng projects reaching final investment decision that are expected to start up in 2022 onwards , and long - term demand for lng expected to rise by 4 % to 5 % per year to 2030 , as lng continues to displace coal.
when we presented at our investor day in november , our key message was that over the past three years we have significantly derisked the teekay group and that we expect stronger earnings and continued balance sheet delevering across our businesses.
for crude tankers , we see strong underlying supply and demand fundamentals for the crude tanker order book at 20 - year lows , measured as a percentage of the existing fleet.
before we begin , i 'd like to direct all participants to our website at www.
on the gas side we have significant declines in lng prices in asia and europe with asia reaching levels below $ 3 per mmbtu , primarily due to the coronavirus outbreak and milder winter weather , which has put pressure on spot lng shipping rates.
first , let 's start off on the near term.
we expect these results to continue to grow in 2020 with adjusted earnings per unit expected to be 45 % to 73 % higher than 2019.
the hummingbird spirit continues to operate on its contract out to 2023 and the customer continues to execute on its previously announced drilling campaign aimed at extending the production life of the field and we are continuing to pursue a divestment of this asset.
our fpso results improved significantly in the fourth quarter as the units ramped up production , following plant maintenance in the third quarter and the recognition of approximately $ 8 million in operational tariff revenues from the foinaven , which is typically recognized in the fourth quarter of each year.
