since announcing the tgp stonepeak merger in early october last year , the team has been working very hard on separating tgp from the rest of the teekay group and setting up both companies for future success.
our q4 results were stronger mainly due to a modest improvement in spot tanker rates.
in fiscal year 2021 , we reported a consolidated adjusted net profit of $ 20 million or $ 0.19 per share , compared to 83 million or $ 0.82 per share in the prior year , and generated total adjusted ebitda of 721 million , compared to 1.1 billion in the prior year.
this decrease primarily reflects the exceptionally strong tanker market in the first half of 2020.
on january 13 of this year we successfully completed the sale of all of our interest in teekay lng to stonepeak , bringing in gross cash proceeds of approximately 641 million to teekay parent.
upon closing the sale , we expeditiously eliminated approximately 330 million of high - cost debt ranging between 5 % and 9.25 %.
we continue to wind down our fpso business , starting with the balance of the decommissioning of the unit is now completed and we are nearing completion of the recycling of the unit in europe.
teekay parent is now largely debt free with a net cash position of over 300 million.
before i hand the call over to kenneth , i will briefly review our financial results.
hummingbird 's decommissioning process is well advanced and relatively straightforward.
we expanded our asset light marine services business in australia through a new strategic long - term contract with the australian government department of defense in september last year.
before we begin , i would like to direct all participants to our website at www.
the foinaven decommissioning and recycling cost is expected to be largely covered by contractual payment from the customer.
we look at teekays current portfolio.
as mentioned on the previous slide , we have a number of transition activities that will continue throughout 2022 as we are evolving both our organization structure and our business mix.
we have now transitioned all the gas employees to tgp , which is being rebranded as cp , and we expect the remaining restructuring and transition activities to be completed throughout 2022.
