we are also supplementing and strengthening our talent acquisition teams by partnering with third - party vendors to assist with our employment outreach through targeted marketing campaigns and professionally staged hiring events.
additionally , on this conference call , we will discuss non-gaap measures that include or exclude certain items.
we encourage you to review those , particularly our safe harbor statement , for a description of the risks and uncertainties that may affect our results.
our third quarter results reflect the returns of pre-pandemic demand across the majority of our geographic markets and verticals.
our comprehensive and innovative product offerings are resonating with customers during this broad - based market recovery , and we expect this demand environment to continue for the foreseeable future.
while we are certainly encouraged by these positive trends , our financial performance continued to be impacted by the unexpected and prolonged global supply disruptions , inflation and labor constraints that have affected virtually every industry and geographic markets.
the t16 is a highly maneuverable battery - operated ride - on scrubber that has proven to be very popular with our customers within the apac region.
as an example , we are making the necessary investments to add production of our t16 line to our china plants mid next year.
the increased demand for our products combined with the effect of macro level constraints on our production capabilities contributed to a record order backlog that varies by product category or region and is now 3 to 5 times our historical averages.
by adding production to the local market , we can help minimize freight costs , improve lead times and better leverage our global production capacity.
in response , we 've taken actions wherever possible to minimize the impact on our operations.
we are doing so not only through short - term mitigation actions , but also to the changes we 've made and continue to make as part of our enterprise strategy.
our plants continue to remain open and operate due to the significant efforts by our global teams to maximize output and to safeguard our customers ' experience.
while we expect that these macro headwinds will continue well into 2022 , we remain confident in our ability to drive long - term sustainable growth and improve our operational efficiencies to generate long - term value for our shareholders.
i 'm william prate , senior director of global financial planning and analysis and investor relations.
we have continued to make capital investments to drive greater efficiency and capacity in all of our plants.
