as we highlighted on our second quarter earnings call and in subsequent forums , global supply chains , logistics systems and labor markets remain tight , and inflation is persistent.
our aggressive goals and bold actions can dramatically reduce carbon emissions and accelerate the world 's progress.
this is more critical every day as the clock is ticking on climate change.
that 's why we are calling for businesses and governments to take stronger action at cop26 and why we continue to set aggressive science - based emission reduction targets to push our innovation further and faster.
long - term sustainability megatrends continue to intensify , and our innovation leadership is transforming the climate industry as the world decarbonizes.
that innovation also extends to emerging trends as we see heightened focus on indoor air quality and strong momentum in aging infrastructure in our schools.
americas and emea have backlog that are up over 90 % and 65 % , respectively , from year - end 2020.
as we do each quarter , i 'd like to spend a few minutes upfront on our focused sustainability strategy , the engine that enables us to deliver differentiated shareholder returns over time.
this unyielding approach drives market outgrowth over the long term , which in turn helps us drive strong margins and powerful free cash flow to deploy through our balanced capital allocation strategy.
we 're well positioned to close out 2021 on a strong note and to enter 2022 with unprecedented levels of backlog as well.
the end result is more value across the board for our customers , for our team , for our shareholders and for the planet.
bookings were once again exceptional in q3 , building on strong growth in both q1 and q2 and bringing our year - to - date organic bookings growth to over 25 % for the enterprise.
moving to slide number four.
please see our sec filings for a description of some of the factors that may cause our actual results to differ materially from anticipated results.
please go to slide two.
organic revenues were also strong , up low to mid-teens.
