repreve 's strength in the turkish market continues , with a new line of denim by mavi jeans.
so craig and eddie will take you through those details in the next few minutes , but here are four trends that we 're seeing coming out of the first quarter.
the first one is the diversity of our geographic portfolio , it is a strong positive for us , so this quarter , brazil and asia had a very strong q1.
north america came in right above what we forecasted , but they could have done better.
the labor shortages in the u.s. kept us from producing to demand , and we expect that that headwinds probably going to persist through quarter two.
and then in the second half of the year , we expect to see some improvement in that trend.
ebitda grew 119 % versus year ago this quarter -- this year and then up 62 % versus two years ago , so both give us a strong start for fiscal 2022.
our manufacturing and hr teams have been working on the obvious fixes such as labor rate and benefits to make sure that we remain competitive in the marketplace.
then , i think you can expect north america to start contributing more to our growth.
the production on the current small scale that we rolled out is meeting our expectations in terms of efficiency and output.
however , they have discussed -- they discovered several longer term solutions by conducting front line employee round tables in our plants.
the third trend is productivity and the investment in evocooler technology and our operation will provide strong long - term productivity and we will begin seeing a little bit of that in the fourth quarter of this fiscal year.
i think , customers right now are continuing to step up their commitment to recycled materials in apparel and footwear and auto and we 've had numerous positive customer wins over the last quarter.
we 've asked our employees what can we do to make their jobs more fulfilling and to keep them with us for a longer time and they 've come up with several very interesting improvements that are pragmatic and they 're being implemented , everything from the quality of training and the amount of training to changing the way that the work gets done.
it should be noted that the impacts of covid are still being felt primarily in our manufacturing plants , resulting in us having to quarantine a number of employees.
unfortunately , we have also lost a few of our employees to the virus , and our thoughts go out to their families and friends.
