as we look at growth in our enterprise , the steps we 're taking -- we 've taken to run our business more efficiently have freed up funds that we 're reinvesting in new products and capabilities that tackle some of today 's critical business workplace challenges.
so excluding these items , after - tax adjusted operating income in the second quarter of 2021 was $ 286.2 million or $ 1.39 per diluted common share compared to $ 250.1 million or $ 1.23 per diluted common share in the year ago quarter.
i am very pleased with our second quarter results.
these improved results were driven in large part by the significant decline in covid - related mortality this quarter and by excellent performance in our investment portfolio.
in addition to the positive trends we saw this quarter , i am pleased that our indicators continue to support our expectation of generating slightly positive growth in premium income in our core business segments this year with further improvement expected into 2022.
and rounding it out , we had favorable underlying benefits experience from our closed block business lines , both long - term care and the closed disability block.
we believe we 're making good progress to returning to our pre-pandemic levels of profitability and margins over the coming quarters with the trajectory of that improvement dependent on the developing trends in covid and the delta variant.
we also saw a record level of quarterly operating income for colonial life along with an impressive recovery in sales.
sales trends are emerging in line with our expectations at our primary business lines within unum us.
embedded in our expectations is that covid mortality will improve but only slightly in the third and fourth quarters.
most notably , we saw continued excellent returns from our alternative investment portfolio , which is benefiting from the strong financial markets and growth in the economy.
our sec filings can be found in the investors section of our website at unum.com.
this quarter was also highlighted with some areas of positive upside relative to our expectations.
during the quarter , we launched our new total leave and behavioral health solutions , and we 've logged our first sales for both offerings.
it also highlights that the agency model of colonial life is quite resilient as we saw some of the most pronounced headwinds in the early stages of the pandemic.
on the digital front , platforms like my unum and colonial life 's improved portal are steadily providing more self - service , real - time capabilities for clients and customers.
