on hurricane irma , despite the fact that new claims continued to be reported throughout the first quarter , we still successfully reduced the remaining open claim countdown to below 600.
and currently accruing more reserves than at any point in the company 's history and with a highly experienced rapid response disaster team.
we entered this critical time in a position of strength with a debt - to - equity ratio of less than 2 %.
we are off to a good start in 2020 with solid first quarter results , including an annualized return on average equity of 16.1 % and progress on our reinsurance renewals for june 1.
we have remained highly proficient and steadfast in that commitment.
in this dynamic environment , we continue to support our consumers whether they are shopping for new policies , submitting claims , refinancing or extending terms , while having substantially all of our employees in our rapid response virtual protocol.
on those last two points , i would like to highlight the following.
so as an essential business , we have outfitted our adjusters with the appropriate personal protective equipment.
and for the claims that cannot be adjusted virtually , we recognize the increased hardship placed both on the consumer and our field staff.
most importantly , we continued to accelerate the use of virtual desk adjusting when appropriate.
we do not have exposure to many lines of business directly impacted by covid - 19.
we are inspired by the healthcare providers , the first responders , the ingenuity of our communities , businesses and governments.
we have utilized various virtual tools to continue to attend appraisals , mediations and depositions.
as we prepare for the 3 - year statute of limitation for filing new irma claims , we elected to add another $ 50 million of ibnr to this event.
this brings our booked ultimate to $ 1.45 billion at 3.31 %.
we believe we remain well positioned for 2020 and remain resolute in serving our consumers and creating value for our stakeholders.
