these uncertainties are detailed in documents filed regularly with the sec.
these comparisons are all under the reported dollar basis.
on june 28 , 2021 , the company completed the sale of its occupational workwear business.
accordingly the company has reported the related held for sale assets and liabilities of this business as assets and liabilities of discontinued operations and included the operating results and cash flows of this business in disc ops for all periods through the date of sale.
due to the significant impact of the coronavirus pandemic on our prior year figures , today 's call also contains certain comparisons to the same period in fiscal 2020 for additional context.
joining me on the call will be vf's chairman , president and ceo , steve rendle ; and evp and cfo , matt puckett.
we are encouraged by the strong start to our fiscal 2022 year.
you may also hear us refer to reported amounts , which are in accordance with us gaap.
our global dtc business delivered high single - digit growth relative to prior peak levels driven by a strong acceleration from our brick and mortar stores in the us and continued strength in our digital.
vf revenue has surpassed pre-pandemic levels growing 96 % or 83 % organically to $ 2.2 billion with momentum across brands , regions , and channels.
our teams delivered an outstanding first quarter powering vf back to pre-pandemic revenue levels while driving an earnings recovery well ahead of our initial expectations.
matt , will walk you through our results in detail , but i 'll start off with some q1 highlights.
our organic dtc digital business is now 72 % above fiscal 2020 levels including the growing benefit of our omnichannel capabilities as we serve our consumers seamlessly across their choice of channel.
we continue to see broad based momentum across the portfolio , which furthers my confidence in our ability to accelerate growth through fiscal 2022 and beyond.
while the near - term environment remains somewhat clouded by virus surges in southeast asia , uncertainties in other regions brought on by the impact of new variants and further pressures on the global supply chain , our teams are executing.
we use adjusted constant dollar amounts as lead numbers in our discussion because we believe they more accurately represent the true operational performance and underlying results of our business.
