on the financial side , we remain disciplined in our allocation of capital , which prioritizes a strong balance sheet and an investment - grade credit rating.
across our system , current gasoline sales are at 95 % of the 2019 level , and diesel sales are 10 % higher than in 2019.
and on the crude oil side , medium and heavy sour crude oil differentials widened during the quarter as opec + increased supply.
charles and meraux refineries and the diamond green diesel plant.
we immediately deployed emergency teams and supplies after the storm to help our employees , their families , and the surrounding communities in the restoration and recovery effort.
the affected facilities did not sustain significant damage from the storm.
the large - scale carbon sequestration project with blackrock and navigator is also progressing on schedule.
with the completion of this 470 million gallons - per - year plan , dgd 's total annual capacity is expected to be 1.2 billion gallons of renewable diesel and 50 million gallons of renewable naphtha.
and once power and utilities were restored , the plants were successfully restarted.
navigator has received the necessary board approvals to proceed with the carbon capture pipeline system as a result of a successful binding open season.
i 'm very proud of our team 's efforts and the ability to safely shut down and restart our operations.
we saw significant improvement in refining margins globally in the third quarter as economic activity and mobility continued to recover in key markets.
if you have any questions after reviewing these tables , please feel free to contact our investor relations team after the call.
with respect to our balance sheet at quarter - end , total debt and finance lease obligations were $ 14.2 billion , and cash equivalents were $ 3.5 billion.
in addition , the expected high natural gas prices in europe and asia through the winter should further support liquid fuels demand as power generation facilities , industrial consumers , and petrochemical producers see incentives to switch from natural gas to refinery oil products for feedstock and energy needs.
continued improvement in earnings of our core refining business , coupled with the ongoing expansion of our renewables businesses should strengthen our competitive advantage and drive long - term shareholder returns.
