an effective , widely distributed vaccine will further improve conditions for a senior housing recovery.
our enterprise continues to benefit significantly from our steady commitment over decades and various cycles to asset class operator and geographical diversification.
we aim to generate reliable growing cash flows from a high - quality diverse portfolio of assets on a strong balance sheet.
we 've seen that staying disciplined about diversification has protected the downside and also provided myriad opportunities for our stakeholders.
i 'd like to provide an overview of our consistent strategy , discuss our third quarter results , highlight how we are driving our research and innovation business forward , describe our competitive advantage and managing institutional third - party capital and touch on the positive senior housing operating trends that continue into october.
the current environment is certainly proving out the merits of this strategy.
first , our diversified portfolio is enabling the company to remain strong and stable , despite the disruption occasioned by the covid - 19 pandemic , which has affected our different asset classes and geographies in non-correlated way.
the ventas team is dispersed but unified in spirit as we join you for today 's call.
the south san francisco market consistently ranks as one of the elite life science clusters.
the tenant base is a nice mix of public companies and a diverse group of early to mid-stage life science company.
spurred by record capital flows into the life science sector , this market has less than 2 % lab vacancy , unparalleled access to a large concentration of life science firms and an extensive venture capital network going after the world class talent pool.
the addition of life sciences to our enterprise has provided uplift to our results , our investment activity and our enterprise value.
i will now turn over the call to debra a. cafaro , chairman and ceo.
these materials are available on the ventas website at www.
we also recently recommenced construction on a 400,000 square foot state - of - the - art life sciences project known as one ucity in this thriving research sub market of philadelphia , bookended by 10 and drexel.
this project is designed to be leed certified and total estimated project costs are over $ 280 million.
