our approach to payment deferral requests is to look for resourceful ways to partner with our clients , along with assessing their willingness and capacity to support their business interests.
starting with our second quarter results , western alliance generated net income of $ 93.3 million and earnings per share of $ 0.93 , which was up 12 % over the previous quarter.
driving these results was record operating pre-provision net revenue of $ 194.7 million , up 27.7 % year - over - year and 19.1 % quarter - over - quarter , with strong operating ppnr roa growth of 18 basis points to 2.56 % , which benefited from a recognition of $ 13.9 million in payment protection program net fees.
combined , these trends will support earnings and capital growth and dividend distribution throughout 2020 and 2021.
these results demonstrate that the long - term earnings power of western alliance 's core business remained strong amid the current economic and market volatility and will support significant ongoing capital accumulation , provide financial flexibility to fund balance sheet growth and accommodate changes to the allowance for credit losses or revisions to the economic outlook.
becoming more efficient during this economic uncertainty provides the incremental flexibility to maintain ppnr.
furthermore , this quarter 's positive operating leverage supported our expanding ppnr , as our strong efficiency ratio improved sharply to 36.3 % compared to prior year.
dale will go into more detail in a bit on the specific drivers of our provisions , but our total loan acl to funded loan ratio now stands at 1.39 % or $ 347 million.
throughout the crisis , we have continued to attract new high - quality relationships to our bank at pricing and terms that would not have been available to us in other circumstances.
looking ahead , we will continue to invest in new product offerings and infrastructure to maintain operational efficiency , but q2 levels are temporary and will eventually rise back to a sustainable level in the low - 40s.
continuing our strong balance sheet momentum from 2019 , loans increased $ 1.9 billion this quarter to $ 25 billion and deposits grew $ 2.7 billion to $ 27.5 billion.
i will first provide an overview of our quarterly results and how we are managing the business in this current economic environment , and then dale will walk you through the bank 's financial performance.
we are encouraged by our pipeline and our opportunity to continue to grow in low - risk asset classes.
joining me on the call today are dale gibbons and tim bruckner , our chief financial officer and chief credit officer.
without the inclusion of ppp , loans grew a more modest $ 117 million and deposits demonstrated strong growth of approximately $ 1.6 billion.
however , our branch - light business model and our national business lines strategy continue to give us a competitive advantage.
