i would like to start the call on slide three by paying our respects to the founder of our company , jim waters , who passed away on may 17.
jim continued reaching out to me , not just on technology , but also on our mutual love for science education and then , more recently , on waters.
jim 's legacy will live on with each and every one of our innovations as we continue to strive to deliver benefits.
our teams around the globe have continued to manage admirably through the pandemic , which is still very much with us.
we spent hours in front of a whiteboard debating how to manage innovation and , in particular , how the application of certain technology could deliver benefit.
i remain grateful for the ongoing resilience , commitment and dedication that our team has shown.
this translates to a 7 % stacked cagr versus 2019 for the first half of the year , again , on a constant currency basis.
i met jim the first time in 2019 when he came to talk to me about the merits of a technology we had acquired in a previous company.
moving on to slide 4.
our strong top line growth resulted in year - over - year q2 non-gaap adjusted earnings - per - share growth of 24 % to $ 2.60 per share.
during today 's call , i will provide a brief overview of our second quarter operating results as well as some commentary on our end markets , geographies and technologies.
amol will then review our financial results in detail and provide comments on our updated third quarter and full year financial outlook.
i will also update you on the progress of our transformation plan.
his results - driven experience will further expand the perspective of the board that directly aligns with what is the strategy to accelerate growth and innovation.
jim was a brilliant and spirited scientist and a pioneer in liquid chromatography.
our e-commerce and recurring revenue attachment initiatives are also starting to boost the momentum observed in our year - to - date 2 - year stacked cagr for chemistry and service revenue.
