there are some key points that i want to hit on from a results perspective.
in addition , international sales increased 82 % this quarter with growth in our canadian , mexican and exports businesses.
our backlog and pace of orders remain favorable as well as our ability to capture price in the market , giving us confidence in the updated sales targets we issued today.
demand remained strong at both ads and in infiltrator throughout our end markets and geographic footprint.
our adjusted ebitda increased 4 % on a dollar basis given -- again , driven by the favorable pricing and strong volume growth.
the price increases we issued over the last 10 months largely covered the inflationary pressure on materials and diesel.
it comes at a price , but we are doing what it takes to give materials out to our facilities so we can support customer needs , including incurring additional transportation costs and shuffling production scheduling more than we have in the past.
material availability has improved since our last call.
there are additional headwinds related to driver availability , an increase in the use of common carrier and an increase in common carrier rates that we are working to offset.
we remain committed to meeting our customers ' demand and have efforts underway to ensure we continue to do so.
additionally , in the second quarter , we will experience the largest gap between historically high material prices this year and historically low material prices of last year.
material prices started to rise in october 2020 , increasing more significantly as a result of the winter storms that hit the gulf region in february of 2021.
in the first quarter , our material cost per pound increased significantly compared to the prior year.
our trailing 12 - month leverage ratio was 1.2 times , and we ended the quarter with $ 480 million of liquidity.
a copy of the release has also been included in an 8 - k submitted to the sec.
on slide six , we present our first quarter fiscal 2020 financial performance.
