tempel is already a global leader in the electrical steel laminations market , which supplies the manufacturers of transformers , electric motors and electric vehicle motors.
consolidated net sales in the quarter of $ 1.2 billion were up significantly compared to $ 731 million in q2 of last year.
increase in sales was primarily due to higher steel prices along with increased volumes across our businesses and our recent acquisitions.
our gross profit for the quarter increased to $ 185 million from $ 135 million in the prior year quarter and gross margin was 15 % versus 18.5 %.
excluding a small onetime restructuring gain , we generated a second quarter record $ 2.12 per share in q2.
i 'll now spend a few minutes on each of the businesses.
and while supply chains and steel availability remains tight , our teams continue to navigate those challenges exceptionally well.
demand across our other major end markets remains robust.
the large yovery increase was primarily driven by higher spreads combined with slightly higher volumes.
total shipped tons were up 4 % from last year 's second quarter through the inclusion of shiloh 's blanklight business and were flat excluding that acquisition.
production levels in automotive are not approaching historic averages , and a myriad of risks and challenges will persist for several quarters , but we are seeing indications that the worst of the semiconductor - related production interruptions may have passed.
we had another strong quarter in q2 with reported earnings of $ 2.15 per share compared to a loss of $ 1.40 in q2 a year ago.
on our call today , we have andy rose , worthington 's president and chief executive officer ; and joe hayek , worthington 's chief financial officer.
the business environment continues to be very dynamic , whether it 's covid , labor shortages , supply chain issues or the volatility in commodities , particularly steel.
this business is led by a talented team and should experience significant growth in the coming years as the world converts to electric vehicles and the electricity infrastructure is upgraded and expanded to meet these demands.
looking at our balance sheet and liquidity position.
