lease rates for our non-same - store portfolio , which includes strong performance from our class b suburban communities , grew over 2 % during the quarter on a blended basis , comprised of 2.6 % of renewal lease rate growth and 1 % of new lease rate growth.
over the past several months , washreit created and implemented a comprehensive reentry plan to mitigate the spread of covid - 19 at our properties.
we connected with our office tenants through personalized outreach to understand their needs and discuss our approach to make sure that they are comfortable with the protocols that we have implemented.
we are fortunate to have not experienced material bad debt to date in alongside reentry planning , we 've been diligently working with tenants who have been financially impacted by the economic shutdown to discuss and finalize deferral arrangements.
as the local economy gradually reopens , our primary focus continues to center around the health and safety of our residents , tenants , employees and their families.
there is no doubt that these are trying times.
we delivered strong second quarter financial performance against the backdrop of the ongoing economic disruption , highlighting the resilience of our portfolio.
as the washington metro area continues to experience fewer job losses since the pandemic hit than other large metro areas and the u.s. overall.
this is true both historically and during the current downturn.
however , we have adjusted to the new demands of today 's operating environment and have taken swift and deliberate action to protect and support our residents and tenants.
our washington metro focus provides economic stability compared to other major metropolitan areas.
i could not be more proud of the dedication shown by the washreit team during this challenging period.
furthermore , these times have highlighted the importance of social fairness , equity and justice.
participating in today 's call with me will be paul mcdermott , president and chief executive officer ; steve riffee , executive vice president and chief financial officer ; karen filter , senior vice president and general counsel ; drew hammond , chief accounting officer and treasurer ; and graham montgomery , vice president and head of research.
and our company has responded with a refocused commitment to improving diversity , inclusion and belonging within our company and our community and creating long - lasting positive change.
we refer to certain of these risks in our sec filings.
