although wu.com growth is moderating as expected , as we grow from a much larger base and compare results against the prior year 's accelerated growth levels , we anticipate growth to remain healthy as we continue to invest in marketing , product and customer experience.
the expenses that have been excluded from adjusted metrics are specific to certain initiatives , but may be similar to the types of expenses that the company has previously incurred and can reasonably expect to incur in the future.
we appreciate you joining us today to discuss our third quarter results and the progress of our business.
our business continues to rebound from the effects of the covid - 19 pandemic delivering double - digit revenue growth in digital and business solutions as well as strong profitability and operating cash flow during the quarter.
we will also discuss certain adjusted metrics.
additionally , we are continuing to make good progress on our key initiatives , including our pricing evolution and platform enhancements.
we have reconciled those items to the most comparable gaap measures on our website , westernunion.com , under the investor relations section.
with that , based on the latest world bank forecast , we believe we are growing market share.
most of our digital business is westernunion.com , which grew at a healthy pace in the third quarter with 16 % principal growth and 12 % revenue growth.
while these two business grew nicely , the retail business was affected by the slower economic recovery , in particular , recovery in the labor markets where employment of migrant workers remains below 2019 levels.
year - to - date , our cross - border principal increased 19 % , reflecting the elevated levels of support that our customers provide to their loved ones during the period of uneven economic recovery.
as a result , our c2c revenue was flat on a reported basis or down 1 % in constant currency terms with transaction growth down 1 %.
during the call , we will discuss some items that do not conform to generally accepted accounting principles.
on our call today is our ceo , hikmet ersek ; and our cfo , raj agrawal.
constant currency revenue declines were driven by the regional business.
the digital partnership business continued to generate strong performance , driving regional transaction growth in the quarter and was the main contributor to the spread.
